
 UMDL Texts home 

 Login  

 

Home

Search

Browse

Bookbag

Help

< Return to search results list
Experimental notes of the mechanical origine or production of fixtness.
Boyle, Robert, 1627-1691.
Table of contents | Add to bookbag
Page  [unnumbered]Page  [unnumbered]
Experiments, Notes, &c. ABOUT THE Mechanical Origine or Production Of divers particular QUALITIES: Among which is inserted a Discourse of the IMPERFECTION OF THE CHYMIST's Doctrine OF QƲALITIES; Together with some Reflections upon the HYPOTHESIS OF ALCALI and ACIDUM. By the Honourable Robert Boyle, Esq; Fellow of the R. Society.
LONDON, Printed by E. Flesher, for R. Davis Bookseller in Oxford. 1675.
Page  [unnumbered]Page  [unnumbered]
Directions for the Book-binder; to be put immediately after the general Title Page.
THE several Tracts of this Book are to be bound in the order following, viz.
After the Preface of the Publisher to the Reader, and the Advertisements relating to the whole Treatise, is to fol∣low, 
    • 1. The Tract of Heat and Cold.
    • 2. Of Tasts.
    • 3. Of Odours.
    • 4. Of the imperfection of the Chy∣mists Doctrine of Qualities.
    • 5. Reflexions upon the Hypothesis of Alcali and Acidum.
    • 6. Advertisements relating to Chy∣mical Qualities, to be bound next af∣ter the Title Page to Volatility.
    • 7. Of Volatility.
    • 8. Of Fixtness.
    • 9. Of Corrosiveness & Corrosibility.
    • 10. Of Chymical Precipitation.
    • 11. Of Magnetism.
    • 12. Of Electricity.
Page  [unnumbered]
ERRATA.
IN the Tract of Heat and Cold, p. 28. at the end of the page dele Finis▪ and go▪ on to Exp. IX. p. 40. l. 21. r. degree of rapidness. p. 102. l. 15. put a comma after the word before.
In the Tract of Corrosiveness and Corrosibility read in the current Title on the top of p. 2. and 3. & seqq. Corrosiveness and Corrosibility, nor or.
Page  [unnumbered]
THE PUBLISHER TO THE Reader.
TO keep the Reader from being at all surpriz'd at the Date of the Title-Page, I must inform him, that a good part of the ensuing Tracts were Printed off, and in my custody, the last year; and the rest had come out with them divers moneths ago, if the Noble Author had not been hinder'd from committing them to the Press by the desire and hope of being able in a short time to send them abroad more numerous, and by his being hinder'd to do so partly by Remove, partly by the want of some Papers that were odly lost or spoil'd, and partly by the sick∣ness of himself, and divers of his near Page  [unnumbered] Relations. And some of these Impe∣diments do yet suppress what the Au∣thor intended should have made a part of the Book, which now he suffers to be publish'd without them, though di∣vers of his Papers about some other particular Qualities have been written so long ago, as to have lain for many years neglected among other of his old Writings: Which that he may have both leasure and health to review, and fit for publication, is the ardent wish of the sincere Lovers of Real Knowledge, who have reason to look on it as no mean proof of his constant kindness to Experimental Philosophy, that in these Tracts he perseveres in his course of freely and candidly communicating his Experiments and Observations to the publick, notwithstanding the liberty that hath been too boldly taken to men∣tion them as their own by some later Writers; as particularly by the Compi∣ler of the Treatise, entitul'd Polygra∣phice, who in two Chapters hath allow'd himself to present his Reader with a∣bove Fifty Experiments, taken out of Page  [unnumbered] our Authors Book of Colours, without owning any one of them to Him, or so much as naming him or his Book in ei∣ther of those Chapters▪ nor, that I re∣member, in any of the others. Nor did I think this practice justified by the con∣fession made in the Preface, importing, that the Compiler had taken the parti∣culars he deliver'd from the Writings of others. For, this general and per∣functory acknowledgment neither doth right to particular Authors, nor, by na∣ming them, enables the Reader to know, whether the things deliver'd come from persons fit to be credited or not: And therefore, since 'tis but too likely, that such Concealment of the Names, if not Ʋsurpation of the Labours of the Be∣nefactors to Philosophy, will prove much more forbidding to many others to im∣part their Experiments, than as yet they have to our generous Author; it seems to be the Interest of the Com∣monwealth of Learning openly to dis∣countenance so discouraging a practice, and to shew, that they do not think it fit that Possessors of useful pieces of Page  [unnumbered] knowledge should be strongly tempted to envy them to the Publick, to the end onely that a few Compilers should not be put upon so reasonable and easie a work, as by a few words or names to shew themselves just, if not grateful.
But not to keep the Reader any lon∣ger from the perusal of these Tracts themselves, I shall conclude with inti∣mating onely, that what our Author saith in one of them concerning the In∣sufficiency of the Chymical Hypothe∣sis for explaining the Effects of Nature, is not at all intended by him to dero∣gate from the sober Professors of Chy∣mistry, or to discourage them from use∣ful Chymical Operations; forasmuch as I had the satisfaction, some years since, to see in the Authors hands a Discourse of his about the Usefulness of Chymi∣stry for the Advancement of Natural Philosophy; with which also 'tis ho∣ped he will e're long gratifie the Pub∣lick.
Page  1
ADVERTISEMENTS Relating to the following TREATISE.
TO obviate some misapprehensions that may arise concerning the ensuing Notes about Particular Qualities, it may not be improper to adde something in this place to what has been said in another† Paper in reference to those Notes, and consequent∣ly to premise to the particular Experiments some few general Ad∣vertisements about them.
And I. we may consider, that there may be three differing ways of treating Historically of Particular Qualities. For either one may in a full and methodical History prosecute the Phaenomena; or one may make a Collection of various Expe∣riments and Observations whence may be gathered divers Phaenomena to illustrate several, but not all of the Heads or Parts of such an ample or methodical History; or (in the third place) one may in a more Page  6 confin'd way content ones self to deliver such Experiments and Observations of the Production, or the Destruction or Change of this or that Quality, as, being duly reason'd on, may suffice to shew wherein the nature of that Quality doth consist, especially in opposition to those erroneous conceits that have been enter∣tained about it. Of the First of these three ways of treating of a Quality I pretend not to have given any compleat example; but you will find, that I have begun such Histories in my Specimens a∣bout Fluidity and Firmness, and in the Experiments, Observations, &c. that I have put together about Cold. The Second sort of Historical Writings I have given an Instance of in my Experiments about Co∣lours; but in these ensuing Notes, the occasion I had to make them having ob∣liged me chiefly to have an eye to the dis∣proval of the errours of the Peripateticks and the Chymists about them, I hope I shall not be thought to have fallen very short in my Attempt, if I have (here and there) perform'd what may be re∣quired in the Third way of writing Histo∣rically of a Quality; my present Design being chiefly to give an Intelligent and Historical Account of the Possible Me∣chanical Origination, not of the various Page  7 Phaenomena of the particular Qualities succinctly mentioned in these Notes; though, my secondary end being to become a Benefactor to the History of Qualities by providing Materials for my self or bet∣ter Architects, I have not scrupled to adde to those, that tend more directly to discover the Nature or Essence of the Quality treated of, and to derive it from Mechanical Principles, some others (which happen'd to come in my way) that ac∣quaint us but with some of the less luci∣ferous Phaenomena.
II. That you may not mistake what is driven at in many of the Experiments and Reasonings deliver'd or propos'd in the ensuing Notes about Particular Qualities, I must desire you to take notice with me, what it is that I pretend to offer you some proofs of. For, if I took upon me to de∣monstrate, that the Qualities of bodies cannot proceed from (what the Schools call) Substantial Forms, or from any other Causes but Mechanical, it might be rea∣sonably enough expected, that my Argu∣ment should directly exclude them all. But since, in my Explications of Qualities, I pretend only, that they may be explica∣ted by Mechanical Principles, without en∣quiring, whether they are explicable by any other; that which I need to prove, is, Page  8 not that Mechanical Principles are the necessary and onely things whereby Quali∣ties may be explain'd, but that probably they will be found sufficient for their ex∣plication. And since these are confessedly more manifest and more intelligible than substantial Forms and other Scholastic En∣tities (if I may so call them) 'tis obvi∣ous, what the consequence will be of our not being oblig'd to have recourse to things, whose existence is very disputable, and their nature very obscure.
There are several ways that may be em∣ployed, some on one occasion, and some on another, either more directly to reduce Qualities (as well as divers other things in nature) to Mechanical Principles; or, by shewing the insufficiency of the Peripa∣tetic and Chymical Theories of Qualities, to recommend the Corpuscularian Do∣ctrine of them.
For further Illustration of this Point, I shall adde on this occasion, that there are three distinct sorts of Experiments (be∣sides other proofs) that may be reason∣ably employ'd, (though they be not e∣qually efficacious) when we treat of the Origine of Qualities. For some Instances may be brought to shew, that the pro∣pos'd Quality may be Mechanically intro∣duc'd into a portion of matter, where it Page  9 was not before. Other Instances there may be to shew, that by the same means the Quality may be notably varied as to degrees, or other not essential Attributes. And by some Instances also it may appear, that the Quality is Mechanically expell'd from, or abolish'd in, a portion of matter that was endow'd with it before. Some∣times also by the same Operation the for∣mer quality is destroyed, and a new one is produc'd. And each of these kinds of Instances may be usefully employ'd in our Notes about Particular Qualities. For, as to the first of them, there will be scarce any difficulty. And as to the second, since the permanent Degrees as well as other Attributes of Qualities are said to flow from (and do indeed depend upon) the same Principles that the Quality it self does; if, especially in bodies inanimate, a change barely Mechanical does notably and permanently alter the degree or other considerable attribute; it will afford, though not a clear proof, yet a probable presumption, that the Principles whereon the Quality it self depends are Mecha∣nical. And lastly, if, by a bare Me∣chanical change of the internal Dispositi∣on and structure of a body, a permanent Quality, confess'd to flow from its sub∣stantial Form or inward Principle, be ab∣olish'd, Page  10 and perhaps also immediately suc∣ceeded by a new Quality Mechanically producible; if, I say, this come to pass in a body Inanimate, especially if it be also, as to sense similar, such a Phaenomenon will not a little favour that Hypothesis which teaches, that these Qualities depend upon certain contextures and other Mechanical Affections of the small parts of the bo∣dies, that are indowed with them, and consequently may be abolish'd when that necessary Modification is destroyed. This is thus briefly premis'd to shew the perti∣nency of alledging differing kinds of Ex∣periments and Phaenomena in favour of the Corpuscular Hypothesis about Qualities.
What has been thus laid down, may, I hope, facilitate and shorten most of the remaining work of this Preamble, which is to shew, though but very briefly, that there may be several ways, not imperti∣nently employable to recommend the Cor∣puscularian Doctrine of Qualities.
For first, it may sometimes be shewn, that a Substantial Form cannot be pre∣tended to be the necessary Principle of this or that Quality; as will (for instance) hereafter be made manifest in the Asperity and Smoothness of bodies, and in the Mag∣netical Vertue residing in a piece of Iron that has been impregnated by a Load∣stone. Page  11 'Tis true, that the force of such Instances is indirect, and that they do not expresly prove the Hypothesis in whose fa∣vour they are alledged; but yet they may do it good service by disproving the Grounds and Conclusions of the Adver∣saries, and so (by removing Prejudices,) making way for the better entertainment of the truth.
Secondly, we may sometimes obtain the same or the like Quality by Artificial and sometimes even temporary Compositions, which, being but factitious bodies, are by Learned Adversaries confess'd not to have Substantial Forms, and can indeed rea∣sonably be presum'd to have but resulting Temperaments: As will be hereafter ex∣emplifi'd in the production of Green by compounding Blew and Yellow, and in the Electrical Faculty of Glass; and in the temporary whiteness produc'd by beating clear Oyl and fair Water into an Oint∣ment, and by beating water into a froth, and, more permanently, in making Coral white by flawing it with heat; and in divers other Particulars, that will more properly be elsewhere mention'd.
Thirdly then, in some cases the Quality propos'd may be either introduced; or vary'd, or distroy'd in an inanimate body, when no change appears to be made in the bo∣dy, Page  12 except what is Mechanical, and what might be produc'd in it, supposing such a parcel of matter were artificially fram'd and constituted as the body is, though without any Substantial Form, or other such like internal Principle. So when a piece of Glass, or of clarify'd Rosin, is, by being beaten to powder, deprived of its Transparency, and made white, there appears no change to be made in the pul∣veriz'd body, but a comminution of it in∣to a multitude of Corpuscles, that by their number and the various scituations of their surfaces are fitted copiously to re∣flect the sincere Light several ways, or give some peculiar Modification to its Rayes; and hinder that free passage of the beams of Light, that is requisite to Transparency.
Fourthly, as in the cases belonging to the foregoing number there appears not to intervene in the Patient or Subject of the change, any thing but a Mechanical alteration of the Mechanical Structure or Constitution; so in some other cases it ap∣pears not, that the Agent, whether natu∣ral or factitious, operates on the Patient otherwise than Mechanically, employing onely such a way of acting as may pro∣ceed from the Mechanisme of the matter, which it self consists of, and that of the Page  13 body it acts upon. As when Goldsmiths burnish a Plate or Vessel of Silver, that ha∣ving been lately boil'd lookt white before, though they deprive it of the greatest part of its colour, and give it a new power of reflecting the beams of Light and vi∣sible Objects, in the manner proper to specular bodies; yet all this is done by the intervention of a burnishing Tool, which often is but a piece of Steel or Iron conveniently shap'd; and all that this Burnisher does, is but to depress the lit∣tle prominencies of the Silver, and reduce them, and the little cavites of it, to one physically level or plain Superficies. And so when a Hammer striking often on a Nail, makes the head of it grow hot, the Hammer is but a purely Mechanical A∣gent, and works by local motion. And when by striking a lump of Glass, it breaks it into a multitude of small parts that compose a white powder, it acts as Me∣chanically in the production of that Whiteness as it does in driving in a Nail to the head. And so likewise, when the powder'd Glass or Colophony lately men∣tion'd is, by the fire, from a white and opacous body, reduc'd into a colourless (or a reddish) and transparent one, it appears not, that the fire, though a na∣tural Agent, need work otherwise than Page  14 Mechanically, by colliquating the inco∣herent grains of powder into one mass; wherein, the ranks of pores not being broken and interrupted as before, the in∣cident beams of Light are allow'd every way a free passage through them.
Fifthly, the like Phaenomena to those of a Quality to be explicated, or at least as difficult in the same kind, may be pro∣duc'd in bodies and cases, wherein 'tis plain we need not recurre to Substantial Forms. Thus a varying Colour, like that which is admired in a Pigeons Neck, may be produc'd in changeable Taffety, by a particular way of ranging and connect∣ing Silk of several Colours into one piece of Stuff. Thus we have known Opals ca∣sually imitated and almost excell'd by Glass, which luckily degenerated in the Furnace. And somewhat the like change∣able and very delightful Colour I remem∣ber to have introduced into common Glass with Silver or with Gold and Mer∣cury. So likewise meerly by blowing fine Crystal-Glass at the flame of a Lamp to a very extraordinary thinness, we have made it to exhibit, and that vividly, all the Colours (as they speak) of the Rain∣bow; and this power of pleasing by di∣versifying the Light, the Glass, if well preserved, may keep for a long time. Thus Page  15 also by barely beating Gold into such thin leaves as Artificers and Apothecaries are wont to employ, it will be brought to exhibite a green Colour, when you hold it against the Light, whether of the day, or of a good Candle; and this kind of Greenness as 'tis permanent in the fo∣liated Gold, so I have found by trial, that if the Sun-beams, somewhat united by a Burning-glass, be trajected through the expanded Leaf, and cast upon a piece of white paper, they will appear there as if they had been tinged in their passage. Nay, and sometimes a flight and almost momentany Mechanical change will seem to over-rule Nature, and introduce into a body the quite opposite Quality to that she had given it: As when a piece of black Horn is, onely by being thinly scra∣ped with the edge of a knife or a piece of glass, reduced to permanently white Shavings. And to these Instances o• Colours, some Emphatical and some Per∣manent, might be added divers belong∣ing to other Qualities, but that I ought not to anticipate what you will elsewhere meet with.
There is yet another way of arguing in favour of the Corpuscularian Doctrine of Qualities, which, though it do not afford direct proofs of its being the best Page  16Hypothesis, yet it may much strengthen the Arguments drawn from other To∣picks, and thereby serve to recommend the Doctrine it self. For, the use of an Hypothesis being to render an intelligible account of the Causes of the Effects or Phaenomena propos'd, without crossing the Laws of Nature or other Phaenomena, the more numerous and the more vari∣ous the Particulars are, whereof some are explicable by the assign'd Hypothesis, and some are agreeable to it, or at least are not dissonant from it, the more valuable is the Hypothesis, and the more likely to be true. For 'tis much more difficult, to finde an Hypothesis that is not true which will suit with many Phaenomena, especi∣ally if they be of various kinds, than but with few. And for this Reason I have set down among the Instances belonging to particular Qualities some such Experi∣ments and Observations, as we are now speaking of, since, although they be not direct proofs of the preferrableness of our Doctrine, yet they may serve for Confir∣mation of it; though this be not the only or perhaps the chief Reason of their be∣ing mention'd. For whatever they may be as Arguments, since they are matters of fact, I thought it not amiss to take this occasion of preserving them from being Page  17 lost; since, whether or no they contri∣bute much to the establishment of the Me∣chanical Doctrine about Qualities, they will at least contribute to the Natural Hi∣story of them.
III. I shall not trouble the Reader with a Recital of those unlucky Accidents, that have hinder'd the Subjects of the following Book from being more nume∣rous, and I hope he will the more easily excuse their paucity, if he be advertised, that although the particular Qualities, a∣bout which some Experiments and Notes, by way of Specimens, are here presented, be not near half so many as were intend∣ed to be treated of; yet I was careful to chuse them such as might comprehend in a small number a great variety; there be∣ing scarce one sort of Qualities, of which there is not an Instance given in this small Book, since therein Experiments and thoughts are deliver'd about Heat and Cold, which are the chief of the four FIRST QƲALITIES; about Tasts and Odours, which are of those, that, be∣ing the immediate objects of Sense, are wont to be call'd SENSIBLE QƲA∣LITIES; about Volatility and Fixity, Corrosiveness and Corrosibility, which, as they are found in bodies purely natural, are referrable to those Qualities, that many Page  18 Physical Writers call SECOND QVA∣LITIES, and which yet, as they may be produced and destroyed by the Chymists Art, may be stiled Chymical Qualities, and the Spagyrical ways of introducing or ex∣pelling them may be referr'd to Chymical Operations, of which there is given a more ample Specimen in the Mechanical account of Chymical Precipitations. And lastly, some Notes are added about Magnetism and Electricity, which are known to belong to the Tribe of Occult Qualities.
IV. If a want of apt Coherence and exact Method be discover'd in the follow∣ing Essays, 'tis hop'd, that defect will be easily excus'd by those that remember and consider, that these Papers were ori∣ginally little better than a kind of Repso∣dy of Experiments, Thoughts, and Ob∣servations, occasionally thrown together by way of Annotations upon some Passa∣ges of a Discourse▪ (about the differing Parts and Red integration of Nitre) where∣in some things were pointed at relating to the particular Qualities that are here more largely treated of. And though the Particulars that concern some of these Qualities, were afterwards (to supply the place of those borrow'd by other Papers whilst these lay by me) increas'd in num∣ber; yet it was not to be expected, that Page  19 their Accession should as well correct the Form as augment the Matter of our An∣notations. And as for the two Tracts, that are inserted among these Essays about Qualities; I mean the Discourse of the Im∣perfection of the Chymical Doctrine of them, and the Reflections on the Hypothesis of Acidum and Alcali, the occasion of their being made parts of this Book is so far express'd in the Tracts themselves, that I need not here trouble the Reader with a particular Account of it.
V. I do not undertake, that all the fol∣lowing Accounts of Particular Qualities would prove to be the very true ones, nor every Explication the best that can be de∣vis'd. For besides that the difficulty of the Subject, and Incompleatness of the History we yet have of Qualities, may well deterre a man, less diffident of his own abilities than I justly am, from assu∣ming so much to himself, it is not abso∣lutely necessary to my present Design. For, Mechanical Explications of natural Phaenomena do give so much more satis∣faction to ingenious minds, than those that must employ Substantial Forms, Sym∣pathy, Antipathy, &c. that the more judi∣cious of the vulgar Philosophers them∣selves prefer them before all others, when they can be had; (as is elsewhere shewn Page  20 at large,) but then they look upon them either as confined to Mechanical Engines, or at least but as reaching to very few of Nature's Phaenomena, and, for that reason, unfit to be received as Physical Principles. To remove therefore this grand Prejudice and Objection, which seems to be the chief thing that has kept off Rational Inquirers from closing with the Mechanical Philo∣sophy, it may be very conducive, if not sufficient, to propose such Mechanical ac∣counts of Particular Qualities themselves, as are intelligible and possible, and are a∣greeable to the Phaenomena whereto they are applied. And to this it is no more necessary that the account propos'd should be the truest and best that can possibly be given, than it is to the proving that a Clock is not acted by a vital Principle, (as those Chineses thought, who took the first, that was brought them out of Europe, for an Animal,) but acts as an Engine, to do more than assign a Mechanical Structure made up of Wheels, a Spring, a Hammer, and other Mechanical pieces, that will re∣gularly shew and strike the hour, whether this Contrivance be or be not the very same with that of the Particular Clock propos'd; which may indeed be made to move either with Springs or Weights, and may consist of a greater or lesser number of Page  21 Wheels, and those differingly scituated and connected; but for all this variety 'twill still be but an Engine. I intend not therefore by proposing the Theories and Conjectures ventur'd at in the fol∣lowing Papers, to debar my self of the Li∣berty either of altering them, or of substi∣tuting others in their places, in case a fur∣ther progress in the History of Qualities shall suggest better Hypotheses or Explica∣tions. And 'twas but agreeable to this In∣tention of mine, that I should, as I have done, on divers occasions in the following Notes, imploy the word Or, and express my self somewhat doubtingly, mention∣ing more than one Cause of a Phaenomenon, or Reason of an opinion, without dogma∣tically declaring for either; since my pur∣pose in these Notes was rather to shew, it was not necessary to betake our selves to the Scholastick or Chymical Doctrine a∣bout Qualities, than to act the Umpire be∣tween the differing Hypotheses of the Cor∣puscularians; and, provided I kept my self within the bounds of Mechanical Philoso∣phy, my design allowed me a great lati∣tude in making explications of the Phaeno∣mena, I had occasion to take notice of.
FINIS.
Page  [unnumbered]Page  [unnumbered]
OF THE MECHANICAL ORIGINE OF HEAT and COLD. By the Honourable ROBERT BOYLE Esq; Fellow of the R. Society.
LONDON, Printed by E. Flesher, for R. Davis Bookseller in Oxford. 1675.
Page  [unnumbered]Page  1Experiments and Notes ABOUT THE MECHANICAL ORIGINE OR PRODUCTION OF HEAT and COLD.
SECT. I. About the Mechanical Production of Cold.
HEAT & COLD being generally lookt upon as the most active among Qualities, from which many other Qualities are deducible, and by which many of Nature's Phaenomena, especially among the Page  2 Peripateticks, are attempted to be explicated; I suppose it will be very proper to begin with Instances of them to shew, that Qualities may be Mechanically produced or destroy∣ed. A not useless Paraphrase of which expression may be this, That a portion of matter may come to be endowed with a Quality, which it had not before, or to be deprived of one that it had, or (sometimes) to ac∣quire or lose a degree of that Qua∣lity; though on the part of the Mat∣ter (or, as some would speak, of the Patient) there do not appear to in∣tervene any more than a change of Texture, or some other Mechanical Alteration; and though the Agents (on their part) do not appear to act upon it otherwise, than after a Me∣chanical manner, that is, by their big∣ness, shape, motion, and those other Attributes by vertue whereof Me∣chanical Powers and Engines per∣form their operations; and this without having recourse to the Peri∣patetic Substantial Forms and Ele∣ments, Page  3 or to the Hypostatical Princi∣ples of the Chymists.
And having here (as in a proper place) to avoid ambiguity, premi∣sed once for all, this * Summary Declarati∣on of the sense, agree∣ably whereunto I would have these Terms understood in the following Notes about the Origine of Particu∣lar Qualities; I proceed now to set down some few examples of the Me∣chanical Production of Cold & Heat, beginning with those that relate to the former, because by reason of their Paucity they will be quickly dis∣patcht. And I hope I shall not need to make an Apology for mentioning no greater number; since I scarce remember to have met with any In∣stances of this kind in any of the Classick Writers of Natural Philo∣sophy.
Page  4
EXPER. I.
MY first Experiment is afforded me by the Dissolution of Sal Armoniac, which I have somewhat wonder'd, that Chymists having of∣ten occasion to purifie that Salt by the help of Water, should not have, long since, and publickly, taken no∣tice of. For if you put into three or four times its weight of Water a pound or but half a pound (or even less) of powder'd Sal Armoniack, and stir it about to hasten the disso∣lution, there will be produc'd in the mixture a very intense degree of Coldness, such as will not be onely very sensible to his hand that holds the Glass whilst the Dissolution is making, but will very manifestly discover it self by its Operation up∣on a Thermoscope. Nay, I have more than once by wetting the out∣side of the Glass, where the disso∣lution was making, and nimbly stir∣ring Page  5 the Mixture, turn'd that exter∣nally adhering water into real Ice, (that was scrap'd off with a knife) in less than a minute of an hour. And this thus generated Cold con∣tinued considerably intense, whilst the action of dissolution lasted; but afterwards by degrees abated, and within a very few hours ceas'd. The particular Phaenomena I have noted in the Experiment, and the practical uses that may be made of it I reserve for another place*, the knowledge of them be∣ing not necessary in this, where what I have already related, may suffice for my present Argument.
And to shew, that not onely a far more intense degree of Cold may e∣merge in this Mixture, than was to be found in either of the Ingredients before they were mingled, but a considerable Coldness may be begun to be produc'd between Bodies that were neither of them actually Cold Page  6 before they were put together, I will subjoin a Transcript of what I find to this purpose among my Ad∣versaria.
EXPER. II.
[I Remember that once I had a mind to try, Whether the Coldness produced upon the Solution of bea∣ten Sal Armoniac in water, might not be more probably referr'd to some change of Texture or Motion resulting from the action of the Li∣quor upon the Salt, than to any In∣frigidation of the water made by the suddain dispersion of so many Saline grains of powder, which by reason of their Solidity may be suspected to be actually more cold than the Water they are put into; I therefore provided a Glass full of that Liquor, and having brought it to such a Tem∣per, that its warmth made the Spirit of Wine in the seal'd Weather-glass Page  7 manifestly, though not nimbly, a∣scend; I took out the Thermoscope, and laid it in powder'd Sal Armoni∣ac, warm'd beforehand; so that the tincted Liquor was made to ascend much nimblier by the Salt than just before by the Water; and having presently remov'd the Instrument in∣to that Liquor again, and poured the somewhat warm Sal Armoniac into the same, I found, as I imagin'd, that within a space of time which I guess'd to be about half a minute or less, the Spirit of Wine began ha∣stily to subside, and within a few mi∣nutes fell above a whole division and a quarter below the mark at which it stood in the water, before that Liquor or the Salt were warm'd. Nor did the Spirit in a great while reascend to the height which it had when the water was cold.
The same Experiment, being at another time reiterated, was tried with the like success; which second may therefore serve for a Confirma∣tion of the first.]
Page  8
EXPER. III.
HAving a mind likewise to shew some Ingenious men, how much the production of Heat and Cold de∣pends upon Texture and other Me∣chanical Affections, I thought fit to make again a Sal Armoniac by a way I formerly publish'd, that I might be sure to know what Ingredi∣ents I employ'd, and shew their ef∣fects as well before conjunction as af∣ter it. I took then Spirit of Salt, and Spirit of fermented or rather putrifi∣ed Urine; and having put a seal'd Weather-glass into an open Vessel, where one of them was pour'd in, I put the other by degrees to it, and observ'd, that, as upon their mingling they made a great noise with many bubbles, so in this conflict they lost their former coldness, and impell'd up the Spirit of Wine in the seal'd Thermoscope: Then slowly evapora∣ting the superfluous moisture, I ob∣tained Page  9 a fine sort of Sal Armoniac for the most part figur'd not unlike the other, when being dissolv'd and filtrated, it is warily coagulated. This new Salt being gently dry'd I put in∣to a wide Glass of water, wherein I had before plac'd a seal'd Weather-glass, that the included Spirit might acquire the temper of the ambient Liquor, and having stirr'd this Salt in the water, though I took it then off the mantle-tree of a Chimney that had had fire in it divers hours before, it did, as I expected, make the tincted Spirit hastily subside and fall consi∣derably low.
EXPER. IV.
SInce if two bodies upon their mix∣ture acquire a greater degree of Cold than either of them had be∣fore there is a production of this additional degree of that Quality, it Page  10 will be proper to add on this occasi∣on the ensuing Experiment.
We took a competent quantity of acid spirit distill'd from Roch-allom, (that, though rectifi'd, was but weak,) which, in the spirit of that salt, is not strange. Of this we put into a wide mouth'd Glass (that was not great) more than was sufficient to cover the globulous part of a good seal'd Thermoscope, and then suffer∣ing the instrument to stay a pretty while in the liquor, that the Spirit of wine might be cool'd as much as the ambient was, we put in little by little some volatile salt sublimed from Sal Armoniac and a fixt Alcali, and notwithstanding the very numerous (but not great) bubbles, and the noise and froath that were produced, as is usual upon the reaction of Acids and Alcalys, the tincted spirit in the Weather-glass, after having continu∣ed a good while at a stand, began a little to descend, and continued (though but very slowly) to do so, till the spirit of Allom was glutted Page  11 with the volatile salt; and this de∣scent of the tincted liquor in the In∣strument being measur'd, appear'd to be about an inch (for it manifestly exceeded seven eighths.) By com∣paring this Experiment with the first part of the foregoing, we may gather, that when Volatile and Urinous Salts or Spirits (for the saline particles appear sometimes in a dry and some∣times in a liquid form) tumultuate upon their being mixt with Acids, neither the Heat nor the Cold that ensues is produc'd by a Conflict with the Acids precisely as it is Acid, since we have seen that an urinous spirit produc'd an actual Heat with spirit of Salt, and the distill'd Salt of Sal Ar∣moniac, which is also Urinous, with the acid spirit of Roch-Allom produces not a true effervescence, but a mani∣fest Coldness: As the same Salt also did in a Trial of another sort, which was this.
Page  12
EXPER. V.
WE took one part of Oyl of Vitriol, and shaking it into twelve parts of water we made a mixture, that at first was sensibly warm; then suffering this to cool, we put a sufficient quantity of it into a wide mouth'd glass, and then we put a good Thermoscope Hermetically seal'd, above whose Ball the com∣pounded liquor reached a pretty way. After some time had been allowed that the liquor in the Thermometer might acquire the temper of the am∣bient; we put in by degrees as much volatile Salt of Sal Armoniac as would serve to satiate the acid spirits of the mixture: for, though these two made a notable conflict with tu∣mult, noise, and froth, yet 'twas but a cold ebullition (if I may so stile it,) for the spirit in the Thermoscope descended about an inch beneath the mark it rested at, when the seeming effervescence began.
Page  13
EXPER. VI.
'TIs known that Salt-peter be∣ing put into common water produces a sensible Coldness in it, as it also does in many other Liquors: But that the same Salt put into a Li∣quor of another Constitution may have a quite differing effect, I have convinc'd some inquisitive persons by mingling eight ounces of fine Salt-peter powder'd with six ounces of Oyl of Vitriol: For by that com∣mixture with a Salt that was not only actually, but, as to many other bodies, potentially cold, the Oyl of Vitriol, that was sensibly cold before, quickly conceived a considerable de∣gree of Heat, whose Effects also be∣came visible in the copious Fumes that were emitted by the incalescent Mixture.
Page  14
EXPER. VII.
THis brings into my mind, that though Gunpowder seems to be of so igneous a nature, that, when 'tis put upon a Coal, it is turn'd pre∣sently into flame capable of promo∣ting the deflagration of the Char∣coal, and kindling divers bodies it meets with in its way; yet if some ounces of Gunpowder reduced to powder be thrown into four or five times as much water, it will very manifestly impart a Coldness to it, as experience made with, as well as without, a seal'd Thermoscope has as∣sured me.
This and the foregoing Experi∣ment do readily suggest an Inquiry into the nature of the Coldness, which Philosophers are wont to op∣pose to that which immediately and upon the first contact affect the or∣gans of sense, and which therefore they call Actual or Formal.
Page  15 The success of this Experiment upon a second trial serv'd to confirm it, which is the more strange, because I have found, that a small quantity of Oyl of Vitriol, not beforehand mingled with water, would produce a notable heat in its conflict with a small portion of just such Salt as I em∣ployed before (both the parcels ha∣ving been, if I well remember, ta∣ken out of the same Glass.) And this heat did upon trial, made with the former Thermoscope, make the tincted Spirit ascend much further than the lately recited Experiment made it subside.
Page  16
A DIGRESSION ABOUT POTENTIAL COLDNESS.
POtential Coldness has been ge∣nerally lookt upon, and that partly perhaps upon the score of its very name, as so abstruse a Quality, that 'tis not onely rational but necessary to derive it from the substantial Forms of bodies. But I confess I see no necessity of belie∣ving it not to be referrable to Me∣chanical Principles. For as to the chief Instances of Potential Cold∣ness, which are taken from the ef∣fects of some Medicines and aliments in the bodies of men, it may be said without improbability, that the pro∣duced Refrigeration proceeds chief∣ly from this, that the potentially Page  17 cold body is made up of Corpuscles of such size, shape, &c. that being resolved and disjoined by the Men∣struum of the stomach, or the fluids it may elsewhere meet with, they do so associate themselves with the small parts of the blood and other liquors, as, by clogging them or o∣therwise, to lessen their wonted agi∣tation, and perhaps make them act in a peculiar way as well as less briskly on the nervous and fibrous parts; and the perception of this Imminution (and perhaps change) of motion in the organs of feeling is that, which, being referr'd to the bo∣dy that produces it, we call its Poten∣tial Coldness. Which Quality▪ ap∣pears by this account to be, as I was saying before, but a Relative thing, and is wont to require the diffusion or dispersion of the small parts of the Corpuscles of the A∣gent, and their mingling themselves with the liquors or the small parts of the body they are to refrigerate. And therefore, if it be granted, that Page  18 in Agues there is some morbifick matter of a viscous or not easily dissi∣pable texture, that is harbor'd in some part of the body, and requires such a time to be made fluid and re∣solvable; the Cold Fits of Agues need not be so much admired as they usually are; since, though just be∣fore the Fit the same parcel of mat∣ter that is to produce it were actually in the body, yet it was not by rea∣son of its clamminess actually resol∣ved into small parts, and mingled with those of the bloud, and conse∣quently could not make such a change in the motion of that liquor as is felt in the Cold Fit of an Ague; (for, of the further Change that occasions the Hot Fit, I am not here to speak) And in some other Dis¦eases a small quantity of matter, be∣ing resolved into minute parts, may be able to produce a great sense of Coldness in some part of a body, which by reason of the structure of that part may be peculiarly disposed to be affected thereby; as Page  19 I have known Hypochondriack and Hysterical women complain of great Degrees of Coldness, that would suddenly invade some particular part, chiefly of the Head or Back, and be for a good while trouble∣some there. And that, if a frigori∣fic vapour or matter be exceeding subtile, an inconsiderable Quantity of it being dispersed through the bloud may suffice to produce a no∣table Refrigeration, I have learnt by Inquiry into the Effects of some Poysons; and 'tis not very material, whether the Poyson, generally speaking, be cold or hot, if it meet with a body dispos'd to have those affections that pass for cold ones produced in it. For I have made a Chymical Liquor, that was pene∣trant and fiery enough to the Taste, and had acquired a Subtlety and briskness from Distillation, with which I could almost in a trice, gi∣ving it but in the quantity of about a drop, cast an Animal into that which appear'd a sleep, and the like Page  20 Liquor, in a not much greater quan∣tity, being, by I know not whose mistake, apply'd to the aking Tooth of a very Ingenious Person, did presently, as he soon after told me, give him an universal Refrigerati∣on, and trembling, worse than the cold Paroxisme of a Quartane. And though Scorpions do some∣times cause, by their sting, violent Heats in the parts they hurt, yet sometimes also the quite contrary happens, and their Poyson proves, in a high degree, potentially cold; as may be learnt from the two fol∣lowing Observations recorded by eminent Physicians.*Fa∣mulum habui, (saith Be∣nivenius) qui à Scorpi∣one ictus, tam subito ac tam frigido sudore toto corpore perfusus est, ut algentissimâ nive atque glacie se∣se opprimi quereretur. Verùm cùm algenti illi solam Theriacam ex vino potentiore exhibuissem, illicò curatus est: Thus far he: To whose Narra∣tive I adde this of Amatus Lusitanus.
Page  21 Vir qui à Scorpione in manus digito punctus fuit,* multum dolebat, & refrigeratus totus contremebat, & per corpus dolores, cu∣te totâ quasi acu punctâ, formicantes pa∣tiebatur, &c.
I cannot now stay to enquire, Whether there may not be in these great Refrigerations, made by so small a quantity of Poyson, some small Concretions or Coagulations made of the minute particles of the bloud into little clots, less agile and more unwieldy than they were when they moved separately: which may be illustrated by the little Curdlings that may be made of the parts of Milk by a very small proportion of Runnet or some acid liquor, and the little coagulations made of the Spi∣rit of Wine by that of Urine: Nor will I now enquire, whether, besides the retardment of the motion of the bloud, some poysons and other ana∣logous Agents may not give the mo∣tion of it a new modification, (as if some Corpuscles that usually are Page  22 more whirl'd or brandish'd be put into a more direct Motion) that may give it a peculiar kind of gra∣ting or other action upon the ner∣vous and fibrous parts of the body. These, I say, and other suspicions that have sometimes come into my thoughts, I must not stay to exa∣mine; but shall now rather offer to Consideration, Whether, since some parts of the humane body are very differing from others in their stru∣cture and internal Constitution; and since also some Agents may abound in Corpuscles of differing shapes, bulks, and motions, the same Me∣dicine may not in reference to the same humane body be potentially cold or potentially hot, according as 'tis applied; or perhaps may, upon one or both of the accounts newly mentioned, be cold in reference to one part of the body, and hot in re∣ference to the other. And these ef∣fects need not be always ascrib'd to the meer and immediate action of the Corpuscles of the Medicine, but Page  23 sometimes to the new Quality they acquire in their Passage by associ∣ating themselves with the bloud or other fluids of the body, or to the expulsion of some calorific or frigo∣rific Corpuscles, or to the Dispositi∣on they give the part on which they operate, to be more or less perme∣ated and agitated than before by some subtile aethereal matter, or o∣ther Efficients of Heat or Cold. Some of these Conjectures about the Relative Nature of Potentially cold bodies, may be either confirmed or illustrated by such Instances as these; that Spirit of Wine being inwardly taken is potentially very hot, and yet being outwardly applied to some Burns and some hot Tumours does notably abate the Heat of the inflamed parts, though the same Spi∣rit applied even outwardly to a tender eye will cause a great and dolorous agitation in it. And Cam∣phire, which in the Dose of less than a half or perhaps a quarter of a Scruple, has been observed to dif∣fuse Page  24 a Heat through the body, is with success externally applied by Physicians and Chirurgeons in refri∣gerating Medicines.
But I leave the further Inquiry in∣to the Operations of Medicines to Physicians, who may possibly, by what has been said, be assisted to compose the differences between some famous Writers about the tem∣perament of some Medicines, as Mer∣cury, Camphire, &c. which some will have to be cold, and others maintain to be hot; and shall onely offer by way of confirming, in gene∣ral, that Potential Coldness is onely a Relative Quality, a few Particu∣lars; the first whereof is afforded by comparing together the VI. and the VII. Experiment before going, (which have occasion'd this Digres∣sion about Potential Coldness;) since by them it seems probable, that the same thing may have it in reference to one body, and not to another, according to the disposition of the body it operates upon, or that ope∣rates Page  25 upon it. And the Fumes of Lead have been observed sometimes (for I have not found the Effect to succeed always) to arrest the fluidi∣ty of Mercury, which change is sup∣posed to be the effect of a Potential Coldness belonging to the Chymists Saturn in reference to fluid Mercu∣ry, though it have not that operati∣on on any other liquor that we know of.
And lastly, (for I would not be too prolix) though Nitre and Sal Armoniac be both apart and joynt∣ly Cold in reference to Water, and though, however Nitre be throughly melted in a Crucible, it will not take fire of it self, yet if, whilst it is in Fusion, you shall by degrees cast on it some powder'd Sal Armoniac, it will take fire and flash vehemently, almost as if Sulphur had been in∣jected.
Page  26 But our Excursion has, I fear, last∣ed too long, and therefore I shall presently re-enter into the way, and proceed to set down some Trials a∣bout Cold.
Page  27
EXPER. VIII.
IN the first Experiment we ob∣served, that upon the pouring of water upon Sal Armoniac there en∣sued an intense degree of Cold, and we have elsewhere recited, that the like effect was produc'd by putting, instead of common water, Oyl of Vi∣triol to Sal Armoniac; but now, to shew further, what influence Motion and Texture may have upon such Trials, it may not be amiss to adde the following Experiment: To twelve ounces of Sal Armoniac we put by degrees an equal weight of water, and whilst the Liquor was dissolving the Salt, and by that acti∣on producing a great Coldness, we warily pour'd in twelve ounces also of good Oyl of Vitriol; of which new mixture the event was, that a notable degree of Heat was quickly produced in the Glass wherein the Ingredients were confounded, as un∣likely as it seemed, that, whereas Page  28 each of the two Liquors is wont with Sal Armoniac to produce an intense Cold, both of them acting on it together should produce the contrary Quality. But the reason I had to expect the success, I met with, was this, that 'twas probable the Heat arising from the mixture of the two Liquors would overpower the Coldness produceable by the opera∣tion of either, or both, of them up∣on the Salt.
FINIS.
Page  29
EXPER. IX.
IN most of the Experiments that we have hitherto proposed, Cold is wont to be regularly produc'd in a Mechanical way; but I shall now adde, that in some sort of Trials I found that the Event was varied by unobserv'd Circumstances; so that sometimes manifest Coldness would be produced by mixing two Bodies together, which at another time would upon their Congress disclose a manifest Heat, and sometimes again, though more rarely, would have but a very faint and remiss degree of ei∣ther.
Of this sort of Experiments, whose Events I could not confidently un∣dertake for, I found to be, the disso∣lution of Salt of Tartar in Spirit of Vinegar, and of some other Salts, that were not acid, in the same Men∣struum, and even Spirit of Verdi∣grease (made per se) though a more Page  30 potent Menstruum than common Spi∣rit of Vinegar, would not constantly produce near such a heat at the be∣ginning of its operation, as the great∣ness of the seeming Effervescence, then excited, would make one ex∣pect, as may appear by the follow∣ing Observation transcrib'd verbatim out of one of my Adversaria.
[Into eight ounces of Spirit of Verdigrease (into which we had put a while before a standard-Thermo∣scope to acquire the like temper with the Liquor) we put in a wide-mou∣thed Glass two ounces of Salt of Tar∣tar, as fast as we durst for fear of ma∣king the matter boil over; and though there were a great commoti∣on excited by the action and reacti∣on of the Ingredients, which was at∣tended with a copious froth and a hissing noise; yet 'twas a pretty while e're the Glass was sensibly warm on the outside; but by that time the salt was all dissolv'd, the Liquor in the Thermoscope appear'd to be im∣pell'd Page  31 up about three inches and an half.]
And yet, if my memory do not much deceive me, I have found, that by mixing Salt of Tartar with an∣other Salt, the Texture of the fixt Alkali was so alter'd, that upon the affusion of spirit of Verdigrease, (made without spirit of Vinegar and spirit of Wine,) though there ensu∣ed a great conflict with noise and bubbles, yet, instead of an Incale∣scence, a considerable degree of Coldness was produced.
EXPER. X.
'TIs very probable that further Trials will furnish us with more Instances to shew how the Pro∣duction of Cold may in some cases be effected, varied, or hinder'd by Mechanical Circumstances that are easily and usually overlook'd. I re∣member, on this occasion, that though Page  28 in the Experiment above recited we observ'd, that Oyl of Vitriol and wa∣ter being first shaken together, the volatil salt of Sal Armoniac being afterwards put to them, produced a sensible Coldness; yet I found, that if a little Oyl of Vitriol and of the vo∣latile Salt were first put together, though soon after a considerable pro∣portion of water were added, there would be produc'd not a Coldness, but a manifest degree of Heat, which would impell up the liquor in the Thermoscope to the height of some inches. And I remember too, that though Salt of Tartar will, as we shall see e're long, grow hot in the water, yet having distill'd some Salt of Tartar and Cinaber in a strong fire, and put the whole Caput mor∣tuum into distill'd or Rain-water, it made indeed a hissing there as if it had been Quick-lime, but produced no Heat, that I could by feeling per∣ceive. I shall adde, that not onely, as we have seen already, some un∣heeded Circumstances may promote Page  33 or hinder the artificial Production of Cold by particular Agents, but, which will seem more strange, some unobserv'd, and perhaps hardly ob∣servable, Indisposition in the Patient may promote or hinder the effects of the grand and Catholick Efficients of Cold, whatever those be. This sus∣picion I represent as a thing that fur∣ther experience may possibly coun∣tenance, because I have sometimes found, that the degree of the Ope∣ration of Cold has been much vari∣ed by latent Circumstances, some bodies being more wrought upon, and others less, than was upon very probable grounds expected. And particularly I remember, that though Oyl of Vitriol be one of the firiest liquors that is yet known, and does perform some of the Operations of fire it self, (as we shall elsewhere have occasion to shew) and will thaw Ice sooner than Spirit of Wine or a∣ny other liquor, as I have tried; yet having put about a pound or more, by our estimate, of choice rectified Page  34 Oyl of Vitriol into a strong Glass-Vial proportionable to it, we found, that, except a little that was fluid at the top, it was all congeal'd or co∣agulated into a mass like Ice, though the Glass stood in a Laboratory where a fire was constantly kept not far from it▪ and where Oyl of Vi∣triol very seldom or never has before or since been observ'd to congeal or coagulate so much as in part. And the odness of our Phaenomenon was increas'd by this Circumstance, that the Mass continued solid▪ a good while after the weather was grown too mild to have such Operations upon Liquors far less indispos'd to lose their fluidity by Cold, than e∣ven common Oyl of Vitriol is. On the other side I remember, that a∣bout two years ago, I expos'd some Oyl of sweet Almonds hermetically seal'd up in a Glass-bubble, to ob∣serve what Condensation an intense cold could make of it, (for though Cold expands water, it condenses common oyl;) but the next day I Page  35 found to my wonder, that not onely the oyl remain'd unfrozen by the sharp frost it had been expos'd to, but that it had not its transparency troubled, though 'tis known, that oyl will be brought to concrete and turn opacous by a far less degree of Cold than is requisite to freeze water; notwithstanding which this liquor, which was lodged in a glass so thin, that 'twas blown at the flame of a Lamp, continued fluid and diaphanous in very frosty wea∣ther, so long till I lost the expectati∣on of seeing it congeal'd or concre∣ted. And this brings into my mind, that though Camphire be, as I formerly noted, reckon'd by ma∣ny potentially cold, yet we kept some oyl of it, of our making, wherein the whole body of the Camphire remain'd, being onely by some Nitrous Spirits reduc'd to the form of an Oyl; we kept it, I say, in such intense degrees of Cold, that would have easily frozen water, without finding it to lose its Trans∣parency Page  36 or its Fluidity.
And here I shall put an end to the first Section, (containing our Notes about Cold) the design of which may be not a little promoted by com∣paring with them the beginning of the ensuing Section. For if it be true, that (as we there shew) the nature of Heat consists either one∣ly or chiefly in the local motion of the small parts of a body Mechanically modified by certain conditions, of which the principal is the vehemen∣cy of the various agitations of those insensible parts; and if it be also true, as Experience witnesses it to be, that, when the minute parts of a body are in or arrive at such a state, that they are more slowly or faintly agi∣tated than those of our fingers or other organs of feeling, we judge them cold: These two things laid together seem plainly enough to ar∣gue, that a Privation or Negation of that Local Motion that is requisite to constitute Heat, may suffice for the denominating a body Cold, as Cold∣ness Page  37 is a quality of the Object, (which as 'tis perceiv'd by the mind, is also an affection of the Sentient:) And therefore an Imminution of such a degree of former motion as is ne∣cessary to make a body Hot as to sense, and which is sufficient to the Production of sensible Coldness, may be Mechanically made, since Slow∣ness as well as Swiftness being a Mode of Local motion is a Mechani∣cal thing: And though its effect, which is Coldness, seem a Privation or Negation; yet the Cause of it may be a positive Agent acting Me∣chanically, by clogging the Agile Calorific Particles, or deadning their motion, or perverting their determi∣nation, or by some other intelligible way bringing them to a state of Cold∣ness as to sense: I say Coldness as to sense; because as 'tis a Tactile Quality, in the popular acception of it, 'tis relative to our Organs of Feeling; as we see that the same luke-warm water will appear hot and cold to the same mans hands, if, Page  38 when both are plung'd into it, one of them shall have been newly held to the fire, and the other be benum∣med with frost. And indeed the custom of speaking has introduced an ambiguity into the word Cold, which often occasions mistakes, not easily without much attention and sometimes circumlocution also to be avoided; since usually by Cold is meant that which immediately af∣fects the sensory of him that pro∣nounces a body Cold, whereas some∣times 'tis taken in a more general notion for such a Negation or Immi∣nution of motion, as though it o∣perates not perceivably on our sen∣ses, does yet upon other bodies; and sometimes also it is taken (which is perhaps the more Philosophical sense) for a perception, made in and by the mind, of the alteration produced in the Corporeal Organs by the operation of that, whatever it be, on whose account a body is found to be cold.
Page  39 But the Discussion of these Points is here purposely omitted, as for o∣ther Reasons, so principally because they may be found expresly handled in a fitter place.
Page  40
SECT. II. Of the Mechanicall Ori∣gine or Production of HEAT.
AFter having dispatched the In∣stances I had to offer of the Production of Cold, it remains that I also propose some Experiments of Heat, which Quality will appear the more likely to be Mechanically pro∣ducible, if we consider the nature of it, which seems to consist mainly, if not onely, in that Mechanical af∣fection of matter we call Local mo∣tion mechanically modified, which modification, as far as I have obser∣ved, is made up of three Conditi∣ons.
The first of these is, that the agi∣tation of the parts be vehement, by which degree or rapidness, the mo∣tion proper to bodies that are hot Page  41 distinguishes them from bodies that are barely fluid. For these, as such, require not near so brisk an agitati∣on, as is wont to be necessary to make bodies deserve the name of hot. Thus we see that the particles of water in its natural (or usual) state, move so calmly, that we do not feel it at all warm, though it could not be a liquor unless they were in a restless motion; but when water comes to be actually hot, the motion does manifestly and proportiona∣bly appear more vehement, since it does not onely briskly strike our organs of feeling, but ordinarily produces store of very small bubbles, and will melt butter or coagulated oyl, cast upon it, and will afford va∣pours, that, by the agitation they suffer, will be made to ascend into the air. And if the degree of Heat be such as to make the water boil, then the agitation becomes much more manifest by the confus'd moti∣ons, and waves, and noise, and bub∣bles, that are excited, and by other Page  42 obvious effects and Phaenomena of the vehement and tumultuous moti∣on, which is able to throw up visi∣bly into the air great store of Cor∣puscles, in the form of vapours or smoak. Thus in a heated Iron the vehement agitation of the parts may be easily inferr'd from the motion and hissing noise it imparts to drops of water or spittle that fall upon it. For it makes them hiss and boil, and quickly forces their particles to quit the form of a liquor, and flye into the air in the form of steams. And lastly, Fire, which is the hottest body we know, consists of parts so vehe∣mently agitated, that they perpetu∣ally and swiftly flye abroad in swarms, and dissipate or shatter all the combustible bodies they meet with in their way; fire making so fierce a dissolution, and great a dis∣persion of its own fuel, that we may see whole piles of solid wood (weighing perhaps many hundred pounds) so dissipated in very few hours into flame and smoak, that of∣tentimes Page  43 there will not be one pound of Ashes remaining. And this is the first Condition required to Heat.
The second is this, that the deter∣minations be very various, some par∣ticles moving towards the right, some to the left, hand, some directly up∣wards, some downwards, and some obliquely, &c. This variety of de∣terminations appears to be in hot bo∣dies both by some of the Instances newly mention'd, and especially that of flame, which is a body; and by the diffusion that metals acquire, when they are melted, and by the operations of Heat that are exer∣cis'd by hot bodies upon others, in what posture or scituation soever the body to be heated be applied to them. As a thoroughly ignited Coal will appear every way red, and will melt wax, and kindle brimstone, whether the body be apply'd to the upper or to the lower, or to any o∣ther part of the burning Coal. And congruously to this Notion, though Page  44 air and water be mov'd never so ve∣hemently, as in high Winds and Ca∣taracts, yet we are not to expect that they should be manifestly hot, because the vehemency belongs to the progressive motion of the whole body; notwithstanding which, the parts it consists of may not be near so much quickned in their motions made according to other determina∣tions, as to become sensibly hot. And this Consideration may keep it from seeming strange, that in some cases, where the whole body, though rapidly moved, tends but one way, 'tis not by that swift motion percei∣ved to be made Hot.
Nay, though the agitation be very various as well as vehement, there is yet a third Condition required to make it Calorific, namely, that the agitated particles, or at least the greatest number of them, be so mi∣nute as to be singly insensible. For though a heap of sand or dust it self were vehemently and confusedly a∣gitated by a whirlwind, the bulk of Page  43 the grains or Corpuscles, would keep their agitation from being properly Heat, though by their numerous strokes upon a man's face, and the brisk commotion of the spirits and o∣ther small particles that may thence ensue, they may perchance occasion the production of that Quality.
If some attention be employ'd in considering the formerly propos'd Notion of the nature of Heat, it may not be difficult to discern, that the Mechanical production of it may be divers ways effected. For, ex∣cepting in some few Anomalous ca∣ses, (wherein the regular course of things happens to be over-rul'd,) by whatever ways the Insensible parts of a body are put into a very confus'd and vehement agitation, by the same ways Heat may be introduc'd into that body: agreeably to which Do∣ctrine, as there are several Agents and Operations by which this Calo∣rific Motion (if I may so call it) may be excited, so there may be several ways of Mechanically producing Page  44 Heat, and many Experiments may be reduc'd to almost each of them, chance it self having in the Labora∣tories of Chymists afforded divers Phaenomena referrable to one or other of those Heads. Many of the more familiar Instances, applicable to our present purpose, have been long since collected by our justly famous Verulam in his short, but excellent, Paper de forma calidi, wherein (though I do not acquiesce in every thing I meet with there) he seems to have been, at least among the Mo∣derns, the Person that has first hand∣led the Doctrine of Heat like an Ex∣perimentall Philosopher. I shall therefore decline accumulating a multitude of Instances of the Pro∣duction of Heat, and I shall also for∣bear to insist on such known things, as the Incalescence observable upon the pouring either of Oyl of Vitriol upon Salt of Tartar, (in the making of Tartarum Vitriolatum) or of Aqua fortis upon Silver or Quicksilver, (in the dissolution of these Metals) but Page  45 shall rather chuse to mention some few Instances not so notorious as the former, but not unfit by their variety to exemplifie several of the differing ways of exciting Heat.
And yet I shall not decline the mention of the most obvious and fa∣miliar Instance of all, namely the Heat observed in Quick-lime upon the affusion of cold water, because among learned men, and especially Peripateticks, I find causes to be as∣sign'd that are either justly question∣able or manifestly erroneous. For as to what is inculcated by the Schools about the Incalescence of a mixture of Quick-lime and water by vertue of a supposed antiperistasis or Invigoration of the internal Heat of the Lime by its being invironed by cold water, I have elsewhere shewn, that this is but an Imaginary Cause, by delivering upon Experiment (which any man may easily make) that, if instead of cold water the li∣quor be poured on very hot, the e∣bullition of the Lime will not be the Page  46 less, but rather the greater: And Oyl of Turpentine, which is a light∣er, and is lookt upon as a subtiler li∣quor than water, though it be pour∣ed quite cold on Quick-lime, will not, that I have observed, grow so much as sensibly hot with it.
And now I have mentioned the In∣calescence of Lime, which, though an abvious Phaenomenon, has exer∣cised the wits of divers Philosophers and Chymists, I will adde two or three Observations in order to an Inquiry that may be some other time made into the genuine Causes of it; which are not so easie to be found as many learned men may at first sight imagine. The acute Helmont indeed and his followers have ingeniously enough attempted to derive the Heat under consideration from the conflict of some Alcalizate and Acid salts, that are to be found in Quick-lime, and are dissolved, and so set at liber∣ty to fight with one another by the water that slakes the Lime. But though we have some manifest marks Page  47 of an Alcalizate Salt in Lime, yet that it contains also an Acid Salt, has not, that I remember, been proved; and if the emerging of Heat be a sufficient reason to prove a latent a∣cid Salt in Lime, I know not, why I may not inferr, that the like Salt lies conceal'd in other bodies, which the Chymists take to be of the purest or meerest sort of Alcalys.
For I have purposely tried, [EXPER. I] that by putting a pretty quantity of dry Salt of Tar∣tar in the palm of my hand, and wet∣ting it well in cold water, there has been a very sensible Heat produced in the mixture; and when I have made the trial with a more consider∣able quantity of salt and water in a Viol, the heat proved troublesome∣ly intense, and continued to be at least sensible a good while after.
This Experiment seems to favour the opinion, that the Heat produced in Lime whilst 'tis quenching, pro∣ceeds from the Empyreuma, as the Chymists call it, or impression left Page  48 by the violent fire, that was em∣ploy'd to reduce the stone to Lime. But if by Empyreuma be meant a bare impression made by the fire, 'twill be more requisite than easie, to de∣clare intelligibly, in what that im∣pression consists, and how it operates to produce such considerable effects. And if the effect be ascribed to swarms of Atomes of fire, that re∣main adherent to the substance of the Lime, and are set at liberty to flye away by the liquor, which seems to be argued by the slaking of Lime without water, if it be for some time left in the air, whereby the A∣tomes of fire get opportunity to flye away by little and little: If this, I say, be alledged, I will not deny but there may be a sense, (which I can∣not explicate in few words) wherein the Cooperation of a substantial Ef∣fluvium, for so I call it, of the fire, may be admitted in giving an ac∣count of our Phaenomenon. But the Cause formerly assigned, as 'tis crudely proposed, leaves in my mind Page  49 some Scruples. For 'tis not so easie to apprehend, that such light and mi∣nute bodies as those of fire are sup∣posed, should be so long detained as by this Hypothesis they must be al∣lowed to be, in Quick-lime, kept in well-stopt vessels, from getting out of so laxe and porous a body as Lime, especially since we see not a great Incalescence or Ebullition en∣sue upon the pouring of water upon Minium, or Crocus Martis per se, though they have been calcined by violent and lasting fires, whose Ef∣fluviums or Emanations appear to adhere to them by the increase of weight, that Lead, if not also Mars, does manifestly receive from the O∣peration of the Fire. To which I shall adde, that, whereas one would think that the igneous Atoms should either flye away, or be extinguish∣ed by the supervening of water, I know, and elsewhere give account, [EXPER. II] of an Experiment, in which two Liquors, whereof one was fur∣nished Page  50 me by Nature, did by being several times separated and recon∣joyned without additament, at each congress produce a sensible Heat. And an Instance of this kind, [EXPER. III] though not so odd, I pur∣posely sought and found in Salt of Tartar, from which, after it had been once heated by the affusion of water, we abstracted or evaporated the Liquor without violence of fire, till the Salt was again dry; and then putting on water a second time, the same Salt grew hot again in the Vial, and, if I misremember not, it pro∣duced this Incalescence the third time, if not the fourth; and might probably have done it oftner, if I had had occasion to prosecute the Experiment. Which seems at least to argue, that the great violence of fire is not necessary to impress what passes for an Empyreum upon all calcined bodies that will heat with water.
Page  51 And on this occasion I shall ven∣ture to adde, that I have sometimes doubted, whether the Incalescence may not much depend upon the par∣ticular Disposition of the calcined body, which being deprived of its former moisture, and made more porous by the fire, doth by the help of those igneous Effluviums, for the most part of a saline nature, that are dispersed through it, and adhere to it, acquire such a Texture, that the water impell'd by its own weight, and the pressure of the Atmosphere, is able to get into a multitude of its pores at once, and suddenly dissolve the Igneous and Alcalizate Salt it e∣very where meets with there, and briskly disjoyn the earthy and solid particles, that were blended with them; which being exceeding nume∣rous, though each of them perhaps be very minute, and moves but a ve∣ry little way, yet their multitude makes the confused agitation of the whole aggregate of them, and of the particles of the water and salt vehe∣ment Page  52 enough to produce a sensible Heat; especially if we admit, that there is such a change made in the Pores, as occasions a great increase of this agitation, by the ingress and action of some subtile ethereal mat∣ter, from which alone Monsieur des Cartes ingeniously attempts to derive the Incalescence of Lime and wa∣ter, as well as that of metals dissol∣ved in corrosive Liquors; though as to the Phaenomena we have been con∣sidering, there seems at least to con∣cur a peculiar disposition of body, wherein Heat is to be produced to do one or both of these two things, namely, to retain good store of the igneous Effluvia, and to be, by their adhesion or some other operation of the fire, reduced to such a Texture of its component Particles, as to be fit to have them easily penetrated, and briskly as well as copiously dissi∣pated, by invading water. And this Conjecture (for I propose it as no other) seems favour'd by divers Phaenomena, some whereof I shall Page  53 now annex. For here it may be ob∣served, that both the dissolved Salt of Tartar lately mentioned, and the artificial Liquor that grows hot with the natural, reacquires that Disposi∣tion to Incalescence upon a bare Constipation or closer Texture of the parts from the superfluous moi∣sture they were drowned in before: The Heat that brought them to this Texture having been so gentle, that 'tis no way likely that the igneous Exhalations could themselves pro∣duce such a Heat, or at least that they should adhere in such numbers as must be requisite to such an effect, unless the Texture of the Salt of Tartar (or other body) did pecu∣liarly dispose it to detain them; since I have found by Trial, that Sal Armoniac dis∣solv'd in water, [EXPER. IV] though boiled up with a brisker fire to a dry salt, would, upon its being again dis∣solved in water, not produce any Heat, but a very considerable de∣gree of Cold. I shall adde, that Page  54 though one would expect a great Cognation between the particles of Fire adhering to Quick-Lime, and those of high rectified Spirit of Wine, which is of so igneous a na∣ture, as to be totally inflammable; yet I have not found, that the affu∣sion of Alkaol of Wine upon Quick-Lime, would produce any sensible Incalescence, or any visible dissolution or dissipation of the Lime, as common water would have done, though it seemed to be greedily e∣nough soaked in by the lumps of Lime. And I further tried, that, if on this Lime so drenched I poured cold water, there insued no manifest Heat, nor did I so much as find the lump swelled, and thereby broken, till some hours after; which seems to argue, that the Texture of the Lime was such, as to admit the par∣ticles of the Spirit of Wine into some of its pores, which were ei∣ther larger or more congruous, with∣out admitting it into the most nu∣merous ones, whereinto the Liquor Page  55 must be received, to be able sudden∣ly to dissipate the Corpuscles of Lime into their minuter particles, into which (Corpuscles) it seems that the change that the aqueous particles received by associating with the spirituous ones, made them far less fit to penetrate and move brisk∣ly there, than if they had enter'd alone.
I made also an Experiment that seems to favour our Conjecture, by shewing how much the Disposi∣tion of Lime to Incalescence may depend upon an idoneous Texture, and the Experiment, as I find it re∣gistred in one of my Memorials, is this.
EXPER. V.
[UPon Quick-lime we put in a Retort as much moderately strong Spirit of Wine as would drench it, and swim a pretty way a∣bove it; and then distilling with a Page  56 gentle fire, we drew off some Spirit of Wine much stronger than that which had been put on, and then the Phlegm following it, the fire was in∣creas'd, which brought over a good deal of phlegmatic strengthless Li∣quor; by which one would have thought that the Quick-lime had been slaked; but when the remain∣ing matter had been taken out of the Retort, and suffer'd to cool, it appear'd to have a fiery disposition that it had not before. For if any lump of it as big as a Nutmeg or an Almond was cast into the water, it would hiss as if a coal of fire had been plunged into the Liquor, which was soon thereby sensibly heated. Nay, having kept divers lumps of this prepared Calx well cover'd from the air for divers weeks, to try whether it would retain this proper∣ty, I found, as I expected, that the Calx operated after the same man∣ner, if not more powerfully. For sometimes, especially when 'twas re∣duced to small pieces, it would upon Page  57 its coming into the water make such a brisk noise, as might almost pass for a kind of Explosion.]
These Phaenomena seem to argue, that the Disposition that Lime has to grow hot with water, depends much on some peculiar Texture, since the aqueous parts, that one would think capable of quenching all or most of the Atomes of Fire that are suppo∣sed to adhere to Quick-lime, did not near so much weaken the disposition of it to Incalescence, as the accessi∣on of the spirituous Corpuscles and their Contexture, with those of the Lime, increased that igneous Dispo∣sition. And that there might inter∣vene such an association, seems to me the more probable, not onely because much of the distill'd Liquor was as phlegmatick, as if it had been robb'd of its more active parts, but because I have sometimes had Spirit of Wine come over with Quick-lime not in unobserved steams, but white fumes. To which I shall adde, that, besides that the Taste, and perhaps Page  58 Odour of the Spirit of Wine, is oft∣en manifestly changed by a well-made Distillation from Quick-lime; I have sometimes found that Liquor to give the Lime a kind of Alcalizat penetrancy, not to say fieriness of Taste, that was very brisk and re∣markable. But I will not undertake, that every Experimenter, nor I my self, shall always make trials of this kind with the same success that I had in those above recited, in regard that I have found Quick-limes to differ much, not onely according to the degree of their Calcination, and to their Recentness, but also, and that especially, according to the dif∣fering natures of the stones and o∣ther bodies calcined. Which Ob∣servation engages me the more to propose what hath been hitherto de∣liver'd about Quick-lime, as onely Narratives and a Conjecture; which I now perceive has detain'd us so long, that I am oblig'd to hasten to the re∣maining Experiments, and to be the more succinct in delivering them.
Page  59
EXPER. VI.
ANd it will be convenient to be∣gin with an instance or two of the Production of Heat, wherein there appears not to intervene any thing in the part of the Agent or Patient but Local Motion, and the natural Effects of it. And as to this sort of Experiments, a little attenti∣on and reflection may make some fa∣miliar Phaenomenon apposite to our present purpose. When, for ex∣ample, a Smith does hastily hammer a Nail or such like piece of iron, the hammer'd metal will grow exceeding hot, and yet there appears not any thing to make it so, save the forcible motion of the hammer which im∣presses a vehement and variously de∣termin'd agitation of the small parts of the Iron; which being a cold body before, by that superinduc'd commotion of its small parts, be∣comes in divers senses hot; first in a Page  60 more lax acceptation of the word in reference to some other bodies, in respect of whom 'twas cold before, and then sensibly hot; because this newly gain'd agitation surpasses that of the parts of our fingers. And in this Instance 'tis not to be o∣verlookt, that oftentimes neither the hammer, by which, nor the an∣vil, on which a cold piece of Iron is forged, (for all iron does not re∣quire precedent ignition to make it obey the hammer) continue cold, after the operation is ended; which shews, that the Heat acquir'd by the forged piece of iron was not com∣municated by the Hammer or Anvil as Heat, but produc'd in it by moti∣on, which was great enough to put so small a body as the piece of iron into a strong and confus'd motion of its parts without being able to have the like operation upon so much grea∣ter masses of metal, as the Hammer and the Anvil; though if the percus∣sions were often and nimbly renew∣ed, and the Hammer were but small, Page  61 this also might be heated, (though not so soon nor so much as the iron;) by which one may also take notice, that 'tis not necessary, a body should be it self hot, to be calorific. And now I speak of striking an iron with a Hammer, I am put in mind of an Observation that seems to contradict, but does indeed confirm, our Theory: Namely, that, if a somewhat large nail be driven by a hammer into a plank or piece of wood, it will re∣ceive divers strokes on the head be∣fore it grow hot; but when 'tis dri∣ven to the head, so that it can go no further▪ a few strokes will suffice to give it a considerable Heat; for whilst, at every blow of the ham∣mer, the nail enters further and fur∣ther into the wood, the motion that is produc'd is chiefly progressive, and is of the whole nail tending one way; whereas, when that motion is stopt, then the impulse given by the stroke being unable either to drive the nail further on, or destroy its in∣tireness, must be spent in making a Page  62 various vehement and intestine com∣motion of the parts among them∣selves, and in such an one we for∣merly observ'd the nature of Heat to consist.
EXPER. VII.
IN the foregoing Experiment the brisk agitation of the parts of a heated iron was made sensible to the touch; I shall now adde one of the attempts, that I remember I made to render it discoverable to the eye it self. In order to this, and that I might also shew, that not onely a sensible but an intense degree of heat may be produc'd in a piece of cold iron by Local Motion, I caus'd a bar of that metal to be nimbly ham∣mer'd by two or three lusty men ac∣custom'd to manage that Instrument; and these striking with as much force, and as little intermission as they could upon the iron, soon brought it to that degree of Heat, Page  63 that not onely 'twas a great deal too hot to be safely touched, but proba∣bly would, according to my design, have kindled Gunpowder, if that which I was fain to make use of had been of the best sort: For, to the wonder of the by-standers, the iron kindled the Sulphur of many of the grains of the corns of powder, and made them turn blue, though I do not well remember, that it made any of them go off.
EXPER. VIII.
BEsides the effects of manifest and violent Percussions, such as those we have been taking notice of to be made with a hammer, there are among Phaenomena obvious enough, some that shew the Producibleness of Heat even in cold iron, by causing an intestine commotion of its parts: For we find, that, if a piece of iron of a convenient shape and bulk be nimbly filed with a large rough File, Page  64 a considerable degree of Heat will be quickly excited in those parts of the iron where the File passes to and fro, the many prominent parts of the Instrument giving a multi∣tude of strokes or pushes to the parts of the iron that happen to stand in their way, and thereby making them put the neighbouring parts in∣to a brisk and confus'd motion, and so into a state of Heat. Nor can it be well objected, that upon this ac∣count the File it self ought to grow as hot as the iron, which yet it will not do; since, to omit other answers, the whole body of the File being moved to and fro, the same parts, that touch the iron this moment, pass off the next, and besides have leasure to cool themselves by com∣municating their newly received A∣gitation to the air before they are brought to grate again upon the iron, which, being supposed to be held im∣moveable, receives almost perpetual shakes in the same place.
Page  65 We find also, that Attrition, if it be any thing vehement, is wont to pro∣duce Heat in the solidest bodies; as when the blade of a Knife being nimbly whetted grows presently hot. And if having taken a brass Nail, and driven it as far as you can to the end of the stick, to keep it fast and gain a handle, you then strongly rub the head to and fro against the floor or a plank of wood, you may quick∣ly find it to have acquired a Heat in∣tense enough to offend, if not burn ones fingers. And I remember, that going once in exceeding hot weather in a Coach, which for certain rea∣sons we caus'd to be driven very fast, the attrition of the Nave of the Wheel against the Axel-tree was so vehement as oblig'd us to light out of the Coach to seek for water, to cool the over-chafed parts, and stop the growing mischief the excessive Heat had begun to do.
The vulgar Experiment of strike∣ing fire with a Flint and Steel suffici∣ently declares, what a heat in a trice Page  66 may be produc'd in cold bodies by Percussion, or Collision; the later of which seems but mutual Percussion.
But Instances of the same sort with the rest mention'd in this VI. Experiment being obvious enough, I shall forbear to multiply and insist on them.
EXPER. IX.
FOr the sake of those that think the Attrition of contiguous air is necessary to the Producti∣on of manifest Heat, I thought a∣mong other things of the follow∣ing Experiment, and made Trial of it.
We took some hard black Pitch, and having in a Bason, Poringer, or some such Vessel, placed it a conve∣nient distance under water, we cast on it with a good Burning-glass the Sun-beams in such a manner, that notwithstanding the Refraction that they suffer'd in the passage through Page  67 the interposed water, the Focus fell upon the Pitch, wherein it would produce sometimes bubbles, some∣times smoak, and quickly com∣municated a degree of Heat capa∣ble to make Pitch melt, if not also to boil.
EXPER. X.
THough the first and second Ex∣periments of Section I. shew, that a considerable degree of Cold is produc'd by the dissolution of Sal Armoniac in common water; yet by an additament, though but single, the Texture of it may be so alter'd, that, instead of Cold, a notable de∣gree of Heat will be produced, if it be dissolved in that Liquor. For the manifestation of which we devis'd the following Experiment.
We took Quick-lime, and slaked it in common cold water, that all the igneous or other particles, to which its power of heating that Li∣quor Page  68 is ascrib'd, might be extracted and imbib'd, and so the Calx freed from them; then on the remaining powder fresh water was often pour∣ed, that all adhering reliques of Salt might be wash'd off. After this, the thus dulcified Calx, being again well dried, was mingled with an equal weight of powder'd Sal Armoniac, and having with a strong fire melted the mass, the mixture was poured out; and being afterwards beaten to powder, having given it a com∣petent time to grow cold, we put two or three ounces of it into a wide-mouthed Glass, and pouring water upon it, within about a minute of an hour the mixture grew warm, and quickly attain'd so intense a Heat, that I could not hold the Glass in my hand. And though this Heat did not long last at the same height, it continued to be very sensible for a considerable time after.
Page  69
EXPER. XI.
TO confirm this Experiment by a notable variation; we took finely powder'd Sal Armoniac, and filings or scales of Steel, and when they were very diligently mixt (for that Circumstance ought to be observ'd) we caus'd them to be gradually sublim'd in a glass vessel, giving a smart fire towards the latter end. By this Operation so little of the mixture ascended, that, as we desired, far the greatest part of the Sal Armoniac staid at the bottom with the metal; then taking out the Caput mortuum, I gave it time throughly to cool, but in a Glass well stopt, that it might not imbibe the moisture of the Air, (as it is very apt to do.) And lastly, though the Filings of Steel, as well as the Sal Armoniac, were bodies actually cold, and so might be thought likely to increase, not Page  70 check, the coldness wont to be pro∣duced in water by that Salt; yet putting the mixture into common water, there ensued, as we expect∣ed, an intense degree of Heat. And I remember, that having sub∣lim'd the forementioned Salt in di∣stinct Vessels, with the Filings of Steel, and with Filings of Copper, and for curiosities sake kept one of the Caput mortuums (for I cannot certainly call to mind which of the two it was,) divers moneths, (if I mistake not, eight or nine,) we at length took it out of the Vessel, wherein it had been kept carefully stopt, and, upon trial, were not de∣ceiv'd in having expected, that all that while the disposition to give cold water a notable degree of Heat was preserved in it.
Page  71
EXPER. XII.
IF Experiments were made after the above recited manner with Sal Armoniac and other mineral bo∣dies than Iron and Copper, 'tis not improbable, that some of the emer∣ging Phaenomena would be found to confirm what has been said of the Interest of Texture, (and some few other Mechanical Affections) in the Production of Heat and Cold. Which Conjecture is somewhat favoured by the following Trial. Three ounces of Antimony, and an equal weight of Sal Armoniac being diligently powder'd and mixt, were by degrees of fire sublimed in a Glass-vessel, by which Operation we obtain'd three differing Substances, which we caused to be separately powder'd, when they were taken out of the Subliming Glass, lest the air or time should make any change in them; and having before put the ball of a Page  72 good seal'd Weather-glass for a while into water, that the Spirit of Wine might be brought to the tem∣per of the external Liquor, we put on a convenient quantity of the powder'd Caput mortuum, which a∣mounted to two ounces, and seemed to be little other than Antimony, which accordingly did scarce sensi∣bly raise the Spirit of Wine in the Thermoscope, though that were a tender one. Then laying aside that water, and putting the Instrument into fresh, of the same temper, we put to it a very yellow Sublimate, that ascended higher than the other parts, and seemed to consist of the more sulphureous flowers of the An∣timony, with a mixture of the more volatile parts of the Sal Armoniac. And this Substance made the tinct∣ed Spirit in the Thermoscope de∣scend very slowly about a quarter of an inch; but when the Instrument was put into fresh water of the same temper, and we had put in some of the powder of the lower sort of Sub∣limate, Page  73 which was dark coloured, though both the Antimony and Sal Armoniac, it consisted of, had been long exposed to the action of a Sub∣liming Heat; yet the water was thereby speedily and notably cool∣ed, insomuch, that the Spirit of Wine in the Weather-glass hastily descended, and continued to sink, till by our guess it had fallen not much short of three inches. Of these Phaenomena the Etiology, as some Moderns call the Theory, which proposes the Causes of things, is more easie to be found by a little consideration, than to be made out in few words.
We made also an Experiment like that above recited, by subliming three ounces a piece of Minium and Sal Armoniac; in which Trial we found, that though in the Caput mor∣tuum, the Salt had notably wrought upon the Calx of Lead, and was in part associated with it, as appear'd by the whiteness of the said Caput mortuum, by its sweetish Taste, and Page  74 by the weight (which exceeded four drams that of all the Minium;) yet a convenient quantity of this pow∣der'd mixture being put into water, wherein the former Weather-glass had been kept a while, the tincted Spirit of Wine was not manifestly either raised or deprest. And when in another Glass we prosecuted the Trial with the Sal Armoniac that had been sublimed from the Mini∣um, it did indeed make the Spirit of Wine descend, but scarce a quar∣ter so much as it had been made to fall by the lately mention'd Subli∣mate of Sal Armoniac and Anti∣mony.
Page  75
EXPER. XIII.
'TIs known that many learned men, besides several Chymi∣cal Writers, ascribe the Incalescences, that are met with in the dissolution of Metals, to a conflict arising from a certain Antipathy or Hostility, which they suppose between the con∣flicting bodies, and particularly be∣tween the Acid Salt of the one, and the Alcalizate Salt, whether fixt or volatile, of the other. But since this Doctrine supposes a hatred between Inanimate bodies, in which 'tis hard to conceive, how there can be any true passions, and does not intelligi∣bly declare, by what means their sup∣pos'd Hostility produces Heat; 'tis not likely, that, for these and some other Reasons, Inquisitive Natura∣lists will easily acquiesce in it. And on the other side it may be consi∣der'd, whether it be not more pro∣bable, that Heats, suddenly produ∣ced Page  76 in mixtures, proceed either from a very quick and copious diffusion of the parts of one body through those of another, whereby both are con∣fusedly tumbled and put into a calo∣rific motion; or from this, that the parts of the dissolved body come to be every way in great numbers vio∣lently scatter'd; or from the fierce and confused shocks or justlings of the Corpuscles of the conflicting bodies, or masses which may be suppos'd to have the motions of their parts dif∣feringly modified according to their respective Natures: Or from this, that by the plentiful ingress of the Corpuscles of the one into the al∣most commensurate parts of the o∣ther, the motion of some etherial matter that was wont before swiftly to permeate the distinct bodies, comes to be check'd and disturbed, and forced to either brandish or whirl about the parts in a confus'd man∣ner, till it have settled it self a free passage through the new mixture, almost as the Light does thorow di∣vers Page  77 troubled liquors and vitrified bo∣dies, which at length it makes trans∣parent. But without here engaging in a solemn examination of the Hy∣pothesis of Alcali and Acidum, and without determining whether any one, or more of the newly men∣tion'd Mechanical Causes, or whe∣ther some other, that I have not yet named, is to be entitled to the effect; it will not be impertinent to propose divers Instances of the Production of Heat by the Operation of one A∣gent, Oyl of Vitriol, that it may be consider'd whether it be likely, that this single Agent should upon the score of Antipathy, or that of its being an Acid Menstruum, be able to produce an intense Heat in many bodies of so differing natures as are some of those that we shall have oc∣casion to name. And now I pro∣ceed to the Experiments them∣selves.
Page  78 Take some ounces of strong Oyl of Vitriol, and shaking it with three or four times its weight of common water, though both the liquors were cold when they were put together, yet their mixture will in a trice grow intensely hot, and continue consi∣derably so for a good while. In this case it cannot probably be pretend∣ed by the Chymists, that the Heat arises from the conflict of the Acid and Alcalizate Salts abounding in the two liquors, since the common wa∣ter is suppos'd an elementary body devoid of all salts; and at least, be∣ing an insipid liquor, 'twill scarce be thought to have Alcali enough to produce by its Reaction so intense a Heat. That the Heat emergent up∣on such a mixture may be very great, when the Quantities of the mingled liquors are considerably so, may be easily concluded from one of my Memorials, wherein I find that no more than two ounces of Oyl of Vitriol being poured (but not all at once) into four ounces onely of di∣stilled Page  79 Rain-water, made and kept it manifestly warm for a pretty deal above an hour, and during no small part of that time, kept it so hot, that 'twas troublesome to be hand∣led.
EXPER. XIV.
THe former Experiment brings into my mind one that I men∣tion without teaching it in the Hi∣story of Cold, and it appear'd very surprizing to those that knew not the ground of it. For having sometimes merrily propos'd to heat cold li∣quors with Ice, the undertaking seem'd extravagant if not impossi∣ble, but was easily perform'd by ta∣king out of a bason of cold water, wherein divers fragments of Ice were swimming, one or two pieces that I perceived were well drenched with the liquor, and immersing them sud∣denly into a wide-mouth'd Glass wherein strong Oyl of Vitriol had Page  80 been put; for this Menstruum, pre∣sently mingling with the water that adher'd to the ice, produc'd in it a brisk heat, and that sometimes with a manifest smoke, which nim∣bly dissolved the contiguous parts of Ice, and those the next, and so the whole Ice being speedily re∣duced to water, and the corrosive Menstruum being by two or three shakes well dispersed through it, and mingled with it, the whole mix∣ture would grow in a trice so hot, that sometimes the Vial that con∣tain'd it, was not to be endured in ones hand.
Page  81
EXPER. XV.
NOtwithstanding the vast diffe∣rence betwixt common water and high rectified Spirit of Wine, whereof men generally take the for∣mer for the most contrary body to fire, and whereof the Chymists take the later to be but a kind of liquid Sulphur, since it may presently be all reduc'd into flame; yet, as I ex∣pected, I found upon trial, that Oyl of Vitriol being mingled with pure Spirit of Wine, would as well grow hot, as with common water. Nor does this Experiment always require great quantities of the liquors. For when I took but one ounce of strong Oyl of Vitriol, though I put to it less than half an ounce of choice Spirit of Wine, yet those two being lightly shaken together, did in a trice conceive so brisk a Heat, that they almost fill'd the vial with fumes, and made it so hot, thar I had una∣wares Page  82 like to have burnt my hand with it before I could lay it a∣side.
I made the like Trial with the same Corrosive Menstruum, and common Aqua vitae bought at a Strong-water-shop, by the mixture of which Liquors, Heat was pro∣duc'd in the Vial that I could not well endure.
The like success I had in an Ex∣periment wherein Oyl of Vitriol was mixt with common Brandy; save that in this the Heat produced seem'd not so intense as in the for∣mer Trial, which it self afforded not so fierce a Heat as that which was made with rectified Spirit of Wine.
Page  83
EXPER. XVI.
THose Chymists, who conceive that all the Incalescencies of bodies upon their being mixt, pro∣ceed from their antipathy or hostili∣ty, will not perhaps expect, that the parts of the same body, (either nu∣merically, or in specie, as the Schools phrase it,) should, and that without manifest conflict, grow very hot to∣gether. And yet having for trials sake put two ounces of Colcothar so strongly calcin'd, that it was burnt almost to blackness, into a Retort, we poured upon it two ounces of strong Oyl of English Vitriol, and found, that after about a minute of an hour they began to grow so hot, that I could not endure to hold my hand to the bottom of the Vessel, to which the mixture gave a heat, that continued sensible on the outside for between twenty and thirty minutes.
Page  84
EXPER. XVII.
THough I have not observ'd a∣ny Liquor to equal Oyl of Vitriol in the number of Liquors with which it will grow hot; yet I have not met with any Liquor wherewith it came to a greater In∣calescence than it frequently enough did with common Oyl of Turpen∣tine. For when we caused divers ounces of each to be well shaken together in a strong vessel, fasten'd, to prevent mischief, to the end of a pole or staff; the Ebullition was great and fierce enough to be not undeservedly admired by the Specta∣tors. And this brings into my mind a pleasant adventure afforded by these Liquors, of each of which, having for the Production of Heat and other purposes, caus'd a good bottle full to be put up with other things into a box, and sent down in∣to the Countrey with a great charge, Page  85 that care should be had of the Glas∣ses; the Wagon, in which the box was carried, happen'd by a great jolt, that had almost overturn'd it, to be so rudely shaken, that these Glasses were both broken, and the Liquors, mingling in the box, made such a noise and stink, and sent forth such quantities of smoke by the vents, which the fumes had open'd to themselves, that the Passengers with great outcries and much haste threw themselves out of the Wa∣gon, for fear of being burnt in it.
The Trials we made with Oyl of Turpentine, when strong Spirit of Nitre was substituted in the stead of Oyl of Vitriol, belong not to this place.
Page  86
EXPER. XVIII.
BUt though Petroleum, especially when rectified, be, as I have elsewhere noted, a most subtile Li∣quor, and the lightest I have yet had occasion to try; yet to shew you how much the Incalescence of Li∣quors may depend upon their Tex∣ture, I shall adde, that having mixt by degrees one ounce of rectified Petroleum, with an equal weight of strong Oyl of Vitriol, the former Liquor seemed to work upon the Surface of this last named, almost like a Menstruum, upon a metal, innume∣rous and small bubbles continually ascending for a while into the Oleum Petrae, which had its colour manifest∣ly alter'd and deepen'd by the ope∣ration of the spirituous parts. But by all the action and re-action of these Liquors, there was produced no such smoaking and boiling, or intense heat, as if Oyl of Turpen∣tine Page  87 had been employed instead of Oyl of Vitriol; the change which was produc'd as to Qualities being but a kind of Tepidness discoverable by the Touch.
Almost the like success we had in the Conjunction of Petroleum, and Spirit of Nitre, a more full account whereof may be elsewhere met with.
In this and the late Trials I did not care to make use of Spirit of Salt, because, at least, if it be but ordinarily strong, I found its ope∣ration on the Liquors above menti∣on'd inconsiderable, (and sometimes perhaps scarce sensible) in comparison of those of Oyl of Vitriol, and in some cases of dephlegm'd Spirit of Nitre.
Page  88
EXPER. XIX.
EXperienced Chymists will easily believe, that 'twere not diffi∣cult to multiply Instances of Heat producible by Oyl of Vitriol upon solid bodies, especially Mineral ones. For 'tis known, that in the usual preparation of Vitriolum Mar∣tis, there is a great effervescence ex∣cited upon the affusion of the Oyl of Vitriol upon Filings of Steel, espe∣cially if they be well drench'd in common water. And it will scarce be doubted, but that, as Oyl of Vi∣triol will (at least partly) dissolve a great many both calcin'd and testa∣ceous bodies, as I have try'd with Lime, Oyster-shells, &c. so it will, during the dissolution, grow sensi∣bly, if not intensely hot with them, as I found it to do both with those newly named, and others, as Chalk, Lapis Calaminaris, &c. with the last of which, if the Liquor be strong, it will heat exceedingly.
Page  89
EXPER. XX.
WHerefore I will rather take notice of its Operation up∣on Vegetables, as bodies which cor∣rosive Menstruums have scarce been thought fit to dissolve and grow hot with. To omit then Cherries, and divers Fruits abounding in watery juices, with which, perhaps on that very account, Oyl of Vitriol will grow hot; I shall here take notice, that for trial sake, having mixt a convenient quantity of that Liquor with Raisins of the Sun beaten in a Mortar, the Raisins grew so hot, that, if I misremember not, the Glass that contain'd it had almost burnt my hand.
These kind of Heats may be also produc'd by the mixture of Oyl of Vitriol with divers other Vegetable Substances; but, as far as I have ob∣served, scarce so eminently with any dry body, as with the crumbs of Page  90 white bread, (or even of brown) with a little of which we have some∣times produced a surprising degree of Heat with strong or well-de∣phlegm'd Oyl of Vitriol, which is to be suppos'd to have been em∣ployed in the foregoing Experi∣ments, and all others mention'd to be made by the help of that Men∣struum in our Papers about Quali∣ties, unless it be in any particular case otherwise declared.
EXPER. XXI.
'TIs as little observed that Cor∣rosive Menstruums are able to work, as such, on the soft parts of dead Animals, as on those of Vege∣tables, and yet I have more than once produced a notable Heat by mixing Oyl of Vitriol with minced flesh whether roasted or raw.
Page  91
EXPER. XXII.
THough common Sea-salt does usually impart some degree, though not an intense one, of Cold∣ness unto common water, during the act of Dissolution; yet some Trials have informed me, that if it were cast into a competent quantity of Oyl of Vitriol, there would for the most part insue an Incalescence, which yet did not appear to succeed so regularly, as in most of the fore∣going Experiments. But that Heat should be produc'd usually, though not perhaps constantly, by the a∣bove-named Menstruum and Salt, seems therefore worthy of our notice, because 'tis known to Chymists, that common Salt is one main Ingredient of the few that make up common factitious Sal Armoniac, that is wont to be sold in the Shops. And I have been inform'd, that the ex∣cellent Academians of Florence have Page  92 observed, that Oyl of Vitriol would not grow hot but cold by being put upon Sal Armoniac: Something like which I took notice of in rectified Spirit of Sulphur made per Campa∣nam, but found the effect much more considerable, when, according to the Ingenious Florentine Experi∣ment, I made the Trial with Oyl of Vitriol; which Liquor having al∣ready furnished us with as many Phaenomena for our present purpose as could be well expected from one Agent, I shall scarce in this Paper about Heat make any farther use of it, but proceed to some other Expe∣riments, wherein it does not inter∣vene.
Page  93
EXPER. XXIII.
WE took a good lump of com∣mon Sulphur of a conveni∣ent shape, and having rub'd or chaf'd it well, we found, as we expected, that by this attrition it grew sen∣sibly warm; and, That there was an intestine agitation, which you know is Local Motion, made by this attrition, did appear not onely by the newly mention'd Heat, whose nature consists in motion, and by the antecedent pressure, which was fit to put the parts into a disorderly vi∣bration, but also by the sulphureous steams, which 'twas easie to smell by holding the Sulphur to ones nose, as soon as it had been rub'd. Which Experiment, though it may seem trivial in it self, may be worth the consideration of those Chymists, who would derive all the Fire and Heat we meet with in sublunary bo∣dies from Sulphur. For in our case Page  94 a mass of Sulphur, before its parts were put into a new and brisk mo∣tion, was sensibly cold, and as soon as its parts were put into a greater agitation than those of a mans fin∣gers, it grew sensibly hot; which argues, that 'twas not by its bare presence, or any emanative action, (as the Schools speak) that the Sulphur communicated any Heat to my hand; and also that, when 'twas briskly moved, it did impress that Quality, was no more than another solid body, though incombustible as common Glass, would have done, if its parts had been likewise put into an agitation surpassing that of my organs of feeling; so that in our Experiment, Sulphur it self was be∣holden, for its actual Heat, to Lo∣cal Motion, produced by external agents in its parts.
Page  95
EXPER. XXIV.
WE thought it not amiss to try, whether when Sal Armoni∣ac, that much infrigidates water, and Quick-lime, which is known to heat it, were by the fire exquisitely min∣gled, the mixture would impart to the Liquor a moderate or an intense degree of either of those Qualities. In prosecution of which Inquiry we took equal parts of Sal Armoniac and Quick-lime, which we fluxed together, and putting an ounce, by ghess, of the powder'd mixture into a Vial with a convenient quantity of cold water, we found, that the colli∣quated mass did, in about a minute, strike so great a heat through the Glass upon my hand, that I was glad to remove it hastily for fear of being scorched.
Page  96
EXPER. XXV.
WE have given several, and might have given many more, Instances of the Incalescence of Mixtures, wherein both the Ingre∣dients were Liquors, or at least one of them was a fluid body. But sometimes Heat may also be pro∣duc'd by the mixture of two pow∣ders; since it has been observed in the preparation of the Butter or Oyl of Antimony, that, if a sufficient quantity of beaten Sublimate be ve∣ry well mingled with powder'd Anti∣mony, the mixture, after it has for a competent time (which varies much according to circumstances, as the weather, vessel, place, &c. wherein the Experiment is made) stood in the air, would sometimes grow ma∣nifestly hot, and now and then so intensely so, as to send forth copious and fetid fumes almost as if it would take fire. There is another Expe∣riment Page  97 made by the help of Anti∣mony, and a pulveriz'd body, wherein the mixture, after it had been for divers hours expos'd to the air, visibly afforded us mineral Fumes. And to these I could adde more considerable, and perhaps scarce credible, Instances of bodies growing hot without Liquors, if Philanthropy did not forbid me. But to return to our Butter of Antimo∣ny, it seems not unfit to be enquired, whether there do not unobservedly intervene an aqueous moisture, which (capable of relaxing the salts, and setting them a work) I therefore suspected might be attract∣ed (as men commonly speak) from the air, since the mixture of the An∣timony and the Sublimate is prescri∣bed to be placed in Cellars; and in such we find, that Sublimate, or at least the saline part of it, is resolved per deliquium, (as they call it) which is nothing but a solution made by the watery steams wandering in the Air.
Page  98
EXPER. XXVI.
I Have formerly deliver'd some In∣stances of the Incalescence pro∣duc'd by water in bodies that are readily dissolv'd in it, as Salt of Tar∣tar and Quick-lime. But one would not lightly expect, that meer water should produce an Incalescence in solid bodies that are generally grant∣ed to be insoluble in it; and are not wont to be, at least without length of time, visibly wrought on by it; and yet trial has assured me, that a notable Incalescence may be pro∣duc'd by common water in flower or fine powder of Sulphur, and Filings of Steel or Iron. For when, in Summer time, I caus'd to be mingled a good quantity, (as half a pound or rather a pound of each of the In∣gredients) and caus'd them to be throughly drenched with common water, in a convenient quantity whereof they were very well stir∣red Page  99 up and down, and carefully min∣gled, the mixture would in a short time, perhaps less than an hour, grow so hot, that the Vessel that contain'd it could not be suffer'd in ones hand; and the Heat was mani∣fested to other Senses than the Touch, by the strong sulphureous stink that invaded the nose, and the thick smoak that ascended out of the mixture, especially when it was stirr'd with a stick or spattle. Whether the success will be the same at all times of the year, I do not know, and somewhat doubt, since I remember not, that I had occasion to try it in other Seasons than in Summer, or in Autumn.
Page  100
EXPER. XXVII.
IN the Instances that Chymistry is wont to afford us of the Heat produc'd by the action of Menstru∣ums upon other bodies, there inter∣venes some liquor, properly so call'd, that wets the hands of those that touch it; and there are divers of the more judicious Chymists, that joyn with the generality of the Na∣turalists in denying, that Quicksilver, which is indeed a fluid body, but not a moist and wetting one in re∣ference to us, will produce Heat by its immediate action on any other body, and particularly on Gold. But though I was long inclinable to their opinion, yet I cannot now be of it, several Trials having assur'd me, that a Mercury, whether af∣forded by Metals and Minerals, or impregnated by them, may by its preparation be enabled to insinuate it self nimbly into the Page  101 body of Gold, whether calcin'd or crude, and become manifestly incalescent with it in less than two or three minutes of an hour.
EXPER. XXVIII.
SInce we know that some natural Salts, and especially Salt-peter, can produce a Coldness in the water they are dissolved in, I thought it might not be impertient to our en∣quiry into Heat and Cold, and might perhaps also contribute somewhat to the discovery of the Structure of Metals, and the salts that corrode them, if Solutions were made of some Saliform'd bodies, as Chymists call them, that are made up of me∣talline and saline parts, and do so abound with the latter, that the whole Concretions are on their account dissoluble in common wa∣ter.
Page  102 Other Experiments of this sort belonging less to this place than to another, I shall here onely for ex∣ample sake take notice of one that we made upon Quicksilver, which is esteem'd the coldest of Metals. For having by distilling from it four times its weight of Oyl of Vitriol, reduc'd it to a powder, which on the account of the adhering Salts of the Menstruum that it detain'd, was white and glistering, we put this powder into a wide-mouth'd Glass of water, wherein a seal'd Wea∣ther-glass had been left before it be∣gan manifestly to heat the water, as appear'd by the quick and consider∣able ascent of the tincted Spirit of Wine, that continued to rise upon putting in more of the Magistery; which warm event is the more re∣markable, because of the observa∣tion of Helmont, that the Salt ad∣hering to the Mercury, corroded in good quantity by Oyl of Vitriol, Page  103 if it be washed off and coagulated, becomes a kind of Alom.
The event of the former Trial deserves the more notice, because having after the same manner and with the same Weather-glass made an Experiment with common wa∣ter, and the powder of Vitriolum Martis, made with Oyl of Vitriol and the Filings of Steel, the tincted Spirit of Wine was not at all im∣pell'd up as before, but rather, af∣ter a while, began to subside, and fell, though very slowly, about a quarter of an inch. The like Ex∣periment being tried with powder'd Sublimate in common water, the li∣quor in the Thermoscope was scarce at all sensibly either rais'd or de∣prest, which argued the alteration as to Heat or Cold, to have been either none or very inconsider∣able.
Page  104 Having given warning at the be∣ginning of this Section, that in it I aimed rather at offering various than numerous Experiments about the Production of Heat, I think what has been already deliver'd may al∣low me to take leave of this Sub∣ject without mentioning divers In∣stances that I could easily adde, but think it fitter at present to omit. For those afforded me by Trials a∣bout Antiperistasis belong to a Pa∣per on that Subject. Those that might be offer'd about Potential Heat in humane bodies, would per∣chance be thought but unnecessary after what has been said of Poten∣tial Coldness; from which an at∣tentive Considerer may easily ga∣ther, what according to our Do∣ctrine is to be said of the contrary Quality. And divers Phaenomena, which would have been of the most considerable I could have menti∣oned of the Production of Heat, Page  105 since in them that Quality is the most exalted, I reserve for the Title of Combustibleness and Incombustibi∣lity, having already suffer'd this Col∣lection (or rather Chaos) of Par∣ticulars about the Production of Heat to swell to too great a bulk.
FINIS.
Page  [unnumbered]Page  [unnumbered]
EXPERIMENTS, AND OBSERVATIONS, About the Mechanical Production OF TASTS. By the Honourable ROBERT BOYLE Esq; Fellow of the R. Society.
LONDON, Printed by E. Flesher, for R. Davis Bookseller in Oxford. 1675.
Page  [unnumbered]Page  3
EXPERIMENTS, AND OBSERVATIONS, About the Mechanical Production OF TASTS.
TO make out the Mechanical Origine or Production of Sa∣pors, as far as is necessary for my present purpose, 'twill be expedient to premise in general, that, accor∣ding to our notion of Tasts, they may depend upon the bigness, figure and motion of the saporifick corpu∣scles, considered separately, and as the affections of single and very mi∣nute particles of matter; or else in a state of conjunction, as two or more Page  4 of these affections, and the particles they belong to, may be combined or associated, either among themselves, or with other particles, that were not saporous before. And as these Coalitions and other Associations come to be diversified; so the Tasts, resulting from them, will be altered or destroyed.
But, to handle these distinctly and fully, were a task not onely too dif∣ficult and long, but improper in this place, where I pretend to deliver not Speculations, but matters of Fact: in setting down whereof nevertheless, to avoid too much confusion, I am content, where I can doe it readily and conveniently, in some of my Tri∣als, to couch such references as may best point at those Heads, whence the Mechanical explications may be derived, and consequently our Do∣ctrine confirmed.
By Tast considered as belonging to the Object, (under which Notion I here treat of it,) I mean that quality, or whatever else it be, which ena∣bles Page  5 a body by its operation, to pro∣duce in us that sensation, which we feel or perceive when we say we tast.
That this something, whether you will call it a quality, or whatever else it be that makes or denominates an object saporous, or rather (if I may be allowed a barbarous term) sapo∣rifick, may so depend upon the shape, size, motion, and other Mechanical affections of the small parts of the tasted body, and result from the as∣sociation of two or more of them, not excluding their congruity or in∣congruity to the organs of Tasting, may be made probable by the fol∣lowing Instances.
Page  6
EXPER. I.
To divide a Body, almost insipid, into two Bodies of very strong and very differing Tasts.
'TIS observed, that Salt-peter refined, and by that purifica∣tion freed from the Sea-salt that is wont to be mingled with it, does rather cool the tongue, than make any great saporifick impressions on it. And though I will not say, that it is, as some have thought, an insipid bo∣dy; yet the bitterishness, which seems to be its proper tast, is but very faint and languid. And yet this almost insipid body, being distilled by the way of Inflammation, (which I else∣where teach,) or even by the help of an additament of such clay as is it self a tastless body, will afford a Ni∣trous spirit, that is extreamly sharp or corrosive upon the tongue, and will dissolve several Metals them∣selves, and a fixt salt, that is like∣wise Page  7 very strongly tasted, but of a tast altogether different from that of the Spirit, that is extreamly sharp or corrosive upon the tongue; and ac∣cordingly, this salt will dissolve di∣vers compact bodies that the other will not work on, and will precipi∣tate divers metals and other con∣cretes out of those solutions, that have been made of them by the Spi∣rit.
EXPER. II.
Of two Bodies, the one highly Acid and corrosive, and the other Alkalizat and fiery, to produce a Body almost insipid.
THis may be performed by the way I have elsewhere mentio∣ned of composing Salt-peter. For if upon a liquour of fixt Nitre, made per Deliquium, you warily drop good Spirit of Nitre, till it be just enough to satiate the Alkaly, (for if there Page  8 be too much or too little, the Expe∣riment may miscarry,) we may by a gentle evaporation, and sometimes without it, and that in a few minutes, obtain Crystals, which, being dried after they have been, if it be need∣full, freed from any adhering par∣ticles, (not of their own nature,) will have upon the tongue neither a sharp nor an alkalizate tast, but that faint and scarce sensible bitterness that be∣longs to Salt-peter, if it be pure Salt-peter; for the impure may perhaps strongly relish of the common Salt that is usually contained in it.
The like production of Salt-peter we have sometimes made in far less time, and sometimes indeed in a trice, by substituting, in stead of the fixed Salt of Nitre, the saline parts of good Pot ashes, carefully freed by solution and filtration from the earthy and feculent ones.
I have sometimes considered, whe∣ther the Phaenomena of these two Ex∣periments may not be explicated by supposing them to arise from the new Page  9 magnitudes and figures of the parti∣cles, which the fire, by breaking them, or forcibly rubbing them one against the other, or also against the Corpuscles of the additament, may be presumed to give them; as if, for example, since we find the larger and best formed Crystals of Nitre to be of a prismatical shape with six sides, we should suppose the corpuscles of Nitre to be little prisms, whose angles and ends are too obtuse or blunt to make vigorous and deep impressions on the tongue; and yet, if these lit∣tle prisms be by a violent heat split, or otherwise broken, or forcibly made as it were to grind one another, they may come to have parts so much smaller than before, and endowed with such sharp sides and angles, that, being dissolved and agitated by the spittle that usually moistens the tongue, their smalness may give them great access to the pores of that organ, and the sharpness of their sides and points may fit them to stab and cut, and perhaps sear the nervous Page  10 and membranous parts of the organ of Tast, and that variously, according to the grand diversities, as to shape and bulk, of the saporifick particles themselves. And this being granted, it seemed further conceivable, that when the Alkalizate and Acid parti∣cles come to be put together in the fluid mixture, wherein they swam, many of them might, after a multitude of various justlings and occursions, meet with one another so luckily and opportunely, as to recompose little prisms, or convene into other bodies, almost like those that made up the Crystals of Nitre, before 'twas expo∣sed to the fire. To illustrate which, we may conceive, that, though a prism of iron may be so shaped, that it will be wholly unfit to pierce the skin; yet it may be so cut by trans∣verse planes reaching to the opposite bases or ends, as to afford wedges, which, by the sharpness of their ed∣ges, may be fit both to cleave wood, and cut the skin; and these wedges, being again put together after a re∣quisite Page  11 manner, may recompose a prism, whose extreams shall be too blunt to be fit for the former use. This may be also illustrated by the breaking of a dry stick circularly cut off at the ends, which though it is unapt, whilst intire and of that bulk, to prick the hand; yet if it be violently broken, the ragged ends of it and the splinters may prove stiff, slender, and sharp enough to pierce and run into the hand: To which di∣vers other such Mechanical Illustra∣tions might be added. But, since I fear you think, as well as I, the main conjecture may not be worthy any farther prosecution, I shall not insist any longer on it. And because the historical part of these Experiments was for the main delivered by me al∣ready in the Essay about the Analysis and Redintegration of Nitre, I shall now proceed to other Trials.
Page  12
EXPER. III.
Of two Bodies, the one extreamly bitter, and the other exceeding salt, to make an insipid mixture.
TO make this Experiment, we must very warily pour upon Crystals made of Silver, dissolved in good Aqua fortis or Spirit of Nitre, strong brine made of common salt and water. For the mixture of these two being dried, and afterwards brought to fusion in a Crucible, and kept a competent while in that state, will afford a tough mass, the Chymists call Luna Cornea, which you may lick di∣vers times, and scarce judge it other than insipid; nor will it easily be brought to dissolve in much more piercing Menstruums than our spit∣tle, as I have elsewhere shewn.
Page  13
EXPER. IV.
Of two Bodies, the one extreamly sweet, and the other salter than the strongest Brine, to make an insipid mixture.
THE doing of this requires some skill and much wariness in the Experimenter, who, to perform it well, must take a strong solution of Minium, made with an appropriated Menstruum, as good Spirit of Vine∣gar, or else Saccharum Saturni it self, dissolved in a convenient Vehicle; and then must have great care and caution to put to it, by degrees, a just proportion of strong Spirit of Sal Armoniac, or the like Urinous Spirit, till the whole be precipitated; and if the two former tasts are not sufficiently destroyed in the mixture, it may be dried and fluxed, as was a∣bove directed about Luna Cornea.
Page  14
EXPER. V.
Of an insipid Body and a sour one, to make a Substance more bitter than Gall or Aloes.
THis is easily performed by dis∣solving in strong Spirit of Nitre or good Aqua fortis as much pure Silver as the Menstruum will take up; for, this solution being filtrated, has been often esteemed more bitter than so much Gall or Wormwood, or any other of those simples that have been famous for that quality: And if the superfluous moisture be abstra∣cted, you may by coagulation obtain Crystals of Luna, that have been judged more strongly bitter than the solution it self. And that the cor∣puscles of these Crystals should leave a far more lasting tast of themselves, than the above-mentioned bitter bo∣dies are wont to doe, will not seem so marvellous, as I remember some that tried have complained; if we Page  15 take notice, how deep the particles of these Crystals may pierce into the spungy organs of Tast, since, if one does but touch the pulp or nail of ones finger, (first a little wetted with spittle or otherwise,) with the pow∣der of these Crystals, they will so penetrate the skin or nail, and stick so fast there, that you cannot in a reasonable time wash the stain off of the skin, and much less off of the nail, but it will continue to appear many hours on the former, and many days on the other.
EXPER. VI.
Of an insipid Body and a highly corrosive one, to make a Substance as sweet as Sugar.
THis is easily done, by putting upon good Minium purified A∣qua fortis or Spirit of Nitre, and let∣ting them work upon one another in a gentle heat, till the liquour have Page  16 dissolved its full proportion of the metal. For then, if the ingredients were good, and the operation rightly performed, the Menstruum would have a sweetness like that of ordina∣ry Saccharum Saturni. But 'twas not for nothing that I intimated, the ingredients should be also pure and good in their kind; for, if the Minium be adulterated, as often it is, or the Spirit of Nitre or Aqua fortis be mingled, as it is usual before it be purged with Spirit of common Salt or other unfit ingredients, the ope∣ration may be successless, as I have more than once observed.
EXPER. VII.
Of obtaining without addition from the sweetest Bodies, Liquours corrosive enough to dissolve Metals.
IF Sugar be put into a sufficiently capacious Retort, and warily di∣stilled, (for otherwise it will be apt Page  17 to break the Vessel) it will afford, among other things, a copious red Spirit, which, being slowly rectified, will lose its colour, and come over clear. The Caput Mortuum of the Sugar, which I have more than once had of an odd Contexture, may be found either almost or altogether insipid. And though the Spirit will be of a very penetrant tast, yet it will be very far from any kind of sweet∣ness; and though that liquour be thought to be homogeneous, and to be one of the Principles of the ana∣lized Sugar, yet (as I have elsewhere shewn) I found it to be a mixture of two Spirits; with the one of which, besides bodies of a less close Texture, I dissolved (even in the cold) crude Copper, as was easie to be seen by the deep and lovely co∣lour of the solution. And to these sour Spirits, afforded by Sugar it self, we have restored a kind of Sac∣charine sweetness, by compounding them with the particles of so insipid a body as Minium; part of which Page  18 they will in digestion dissolve. A like Spirit to that distilled from Su∣gar may be obtained from Honey; but in regard of its aptness to swell exceedingly, Chymists are not wont to distill it without Sand, Brick, or some other additament.
EXPER. VIII.
To divide a Body, bitter in the highest degree, into two Substances, the one extreamly sour, and the other per∣fectly insipid.
THis is easily done by putting some fine Crystals of Luna into a good Retort, and then distilling them in a Sand-furnace, capable of giving them so strong a fire, as to drive away all the spirits from the Silver. For, this remaining behind, according to its metalline nature, will be insipid, and the spirits, that are driven away from it, will unite in the Receiver into an acid and cor∣rosive Menstruum.
Page  19
EXPER. IX.
To produce variety of Tasts in one insipid Body, by associating it with divers Menstruums.
AS this operation may, upon the account I elsewhere mention, be serviceable to investigate the fi∣gures of the particles of dissolved metals and other bodies; so 'tis ve∣ry fit to manifest, what we would here have it shew, how much Tast may be diversified by, and conse∣quently depend upon, Texture; since a body that has no tast, may, in conjunction with sapid bodies, give them strong tasts all differing from one another, and each of them from that which the saporous bodies had before. I could propose divers ways of bringing this to trial, there being several insipid bodies, which I have found this way diversifiable. But because I remember not, that I have met with any mineral, that is Page  20 dissoluble by near so many saline Menstruums, as Zinke, I look on that as the most fertile Subject to afford Instances to our present purpose. For I have found, that it will be dissolved not onely by Aqua fortis, Aqua Regis, Oil of Vetriol, Spirit of Nitre, Spirit of Salt, and other mi∣neral Menstruums, but also by Ve∣getable Spirits, as distilled Vinegar, and by Animal ones too, as Spirit of Sal Armoniac; though the one be Acid, and the other Urinous. And if the several Solutions, which may be made of this mineral, by so many dif∣fering liquours, be compared, the number of their differing tasts will suffice to make good the Title of the Experiment.
Page  21
EXPER. X.
To produce variety of Tasts with one Menstruum, by associating it with insipid Bodies.
THis Proposition a Mathemati∣cian would go near to call the Converse of the foregoing; and as it may serve as well as that to discover the structure of the minute parts of divers metalline and mineral bodies; so it may not onely as well, but bet∣ter than that, serve us to illustrate the Corpuscularian Doctrine of Tasts, by shewing us, that a single, and, as far as Chymistry teaches us, a simple body, endowed with a peculiar tast, may, by being compounded with others, each of them insipid of it self, produce a considerable number of differing tasts. There may be more Instruments than one made use of in this Trial; but of those that are known, and we may easily obtain, the most proper are Spirit of Nitre, Page  22 and good Aqua fortis: For that, with refined Silver, will make a So∣lution bitter as Galls; with Lead, 'twill be of a Saccharine sweetness; with that part of Tin, which it will keep dissolved, (for the greatest 'tis wont but to corrode and praecipitate) it produces a tast very distant from both the former, but not odious; with Copper, it affords an abominable tast; with Mercury and Iron, it af∣fords other kinds of bad Tasts. Nor are Metals the onely mineral bodies it will work upon: For, 'twill dissolve Tin-glass, Antimony, Brass; to which I could add Emery, Zinke, and other bodies whereon I have tried it. All which together will make up no de∣spicable number of differing Tasts.
Page  23
EXPER. XI.
Of two Liquours, the one highly cor∣rosive, and the other very pungent and not pleasant, to compose a Body of a pleasant and Aromatick Tast.
THis Experiment, which I else∣where mention to other purpo∣ses, does in some regards better suit our present design, than most of the foregoing; since here the Corrosive Menstruum is neither mortified by fixt nor urinous Salts, supposed to be of a contrary nature to it; nor yet, as 'twere, tired out nor disarm'd by corroding of metals or other solid bodies. The Experiment being some∣what dangerous to make at first in great, it may suffice for our present turn, to make it in the less quantity, as follows.
Take one ounce of strong Spirit of Nitre, or of very good Aqua fortis it self, and put to it by little and little, (which caution if you neglect, you Page  24 may soon repent it,) and another ounce of such rectified Spirit of Wine, as, being kindled in a Spoon, will flame all away: When these two liquours are well mixt, and grown cold again, you may, after some di∣gestion, or, if hast require, without it, distill them totally over together, to unite them exquisitly into one li∣quour, in which, if the operation have been well performed, the cor∣rosive particles of the Salts will not onely loose all their cutting acidity, wherewith they wounded the palat; but by their new composition with the Vinous Spirits, the liquour ac∣quires a Vinous tast, that is not one∣ly not acid or offensive, but very pleasing, as if it belonged to some new or unknown Spice.
Page  25
EXPER. XII.
To imitate by Art, and sometimes even in Minerals, the peculiar Tasts of natural Bodies, and even Vegetables.
THis is not a fit place to declare, in what sense I do or do not admit of Souls in Vegetables, nor what I allow or deny to the Seminal or Plastick principle ascribed to Plants: But perhaps it will not be er∣roneous to conceive, that, whatever be the Agent in reference to those Tasts, that are said to be specifick to this or that Plant, that, on whose immediate account it is or becomes of this or that nature, is a complication of Mechanical Affecti∣ons, as shape, size, &c. in the par∣ticles of that matter which is said to be endowed with such a specifick tast.
To illustrate this, I thought it ex∣pedient, to endeavour to imitate the tast of some Natural bodies by Artifi∣cial Page  26 Compositions or Preparations, but found it not easie, beforehand to be assured of the success of such Trials: And therefore I shall content my self here to mention three or four Instances, that, except the first, are rather Observations than such Ex∣periments as we are speaking of.
I remember then, that, making some Trials to alter the sensible Qua∣lities of Smell, Tast, &c. of Oil of Vitriol, and Spirit of Wine, I obtai∣ned from them, among other things that suited with my design, a certain Liquour, which, though at first plea∣sant, would, at a certain nick of time, make one that had it in his mouth think it had been imbued with Gar∣lick.
And this brings into my mind, that a skilful person, famous for making good Sider, coming one day to ad∣vise with me, what he should doe to heighten the tast of it, and make it keep the longer, complained to me, that having, among other trials, put into a good Vessel full of juice of Page  27 Apples a certain proportion of Mu∣stard-seed, with hopes it would make the Sider more spirituous and pick∣ant, he found, to his wonder and loss, that, when he came to draw it, it stank of Garlick so rank, that eve∣ry body rejected it.
I remember also, that, by fermenting a certain proportion (for that we found requisite) of semen Dauci with Beer of Ale, the Liquour had a very pleasant Relish of Limon-pills.
But that seems much more consi∣derable, which I shall now add; That, with an insipid Metal and a very cor∣rosive Menstruum, one may com∣pound a tast, that I have several times observed to be so like a Vege∣table, that I presume it may deceive many. This may be done by dissol∣ving Gold, without any gross Salt, in the mixture of Aqua fortis and the Spirit of Salt, or even in common A∣qua Regis, made by dissolving Sal Ar∣moniac in Aqua fortis. For if the Experiment be happily made, one may obtain either a Solution or a Page  28 Salt, whose austere tast will very much resemble that of Sloes, or of unripe Bullace. And this tast, with some little variety, I found in Gold dissolved without any distilled Li∣quour at all; and also, if I much for∣get not, in Gold that by a peculiar Menstruum I had volatilized.
The last Instance I shall give of the imitation of Tasts, I found to have been, for the main, known to some ingenious Ladies. But to make the Experiment succeed very well, a due proportion is the principal Cir∣cumstance, which is wont to be neg∣lected. I cannot readily call to mind that which I found to succeed best; but the Trial may be indifferently well made after such a manner as this:
Take a pint or a pound of Malaga or Canary Sack, (for though French and the like Wines may serve the turn, yet they are not so proper;) and put into it a drachm or two of good odoriferous Orrice Roots, cut into thin slices, and let them infuse Page  29 in the Liquour a convenient time, 'till you perceive that they have gi∣ven it a desired tast and smell; then keep the thus perfumed Wine exact∣ly stopped in a cool place: According to which way, I remember, that (when I hit on the right proportion of Ingredients, and kept them a due time in infusion) I had many years ago a Wine, which, being coloured with Cocheneele, or some such tingeing ingredient, was taken for good Ras∣berry-Wine, not onely by ordinary persons, but, among others, by a couple of eminent Physicians, one of whom pretended to an extraordinary criticalness of palate on such occa∣sions; both of them wondering, how at such an unlikely time of the year, as I chose to present them that Li∣quour among others, I could have such excellent Rasberry-Wine: Some of which (to add that by the by) I found to preserve the specifick tast two or three years after it was made.
Page  30
A Short EXCURSION About some Changes made OF TASTS BY MATURATION.
IT will not perhaps be thought im∣pertinent, but rather necessary, to add a word or two on this occasion for their sakes, that think the Matu∣ration of Fruits, and the changes of Tasts, by which 'tis usually known, must needs be the effect of the Vege∣table Soul of the Plant. For, after the Fruit is gathered, and so, by be∣ing no longer a part of the Tree, Page  31 does, according to the most common opinion, cease to be a part of the living Plant, as a Hand or a Foot cut off is no more reckoned among the Lims of the man it belonged to; yet 'tis very possible that some Fruits may receive maturation, after they have been severed from the Plants that bore them. For, not to mention, that Apples, gathered somewhat be∣fore the time, by lying in heaps, do usually obtain a mellowness, which seems to be a kind or degree of Matu∣ration; or that Medlars, gathered whilst they are hard and harsh, do be∣come afterwards in process of time soft and better tasted; in which state though some say they are rotten, yet others think that supposed rottenness is the proper Maturity of that kind of Fruit: Not to mention these, I say, or the like Instances, 'tis a famous Assertion of several Writers of the Indian affairs, that the Fruit they call Bananas is usually gathered green, and hung up in bunches or clusters in the house, where they ripen by de∣grees, Page  32 and have an advantageous change made both of their colour and of their tast. And this an an∣cient acquaintance of mine, a literate and observing person, of whom I in∣quired about it, assured me, he had himself lately tried and found to be true in America. And indeed I see not, why a convenient degree of warmth, whether external from the Sun and fire, or internal from some degree of fermentation or analo∣gous intestine Commotion, may not (whether the Fruit be united to the Plant or no) put the sporifick Cor∣puscles into motion, and make them, by various and insensible transcursi∣ons, rub against each other, and there∣by make the little bodies more slen∣der or thin, and less rigid, or cutting and harsh, than they were before, and by various motions bring the Fruit they compose to a state where∣in it is more soft in point of consi∣stence, and abound in Corpuscles less harsh and more pliable, than they were before, and more congruous Page  33 to the pores of the organ of Tast: And, in a word, make such a change in the constitution of the Fruit, as men are wont to express by the name of Maturity. And that such Mecha∣nical changes of Texture may much alter the Qualities, and among them the Tast of a Fruit, is obvious in brui∣sed Cherries and Apples, which in the bruised parts soon come to look and tast otherwise than they did be∣fore. This possibility of this is also obvious by Wardens, when slowly roasted in embers with so gentle a fire, as not to burn off the paper they are wont to be wrapt in, to be kept clean from the ashes. And I have seen, in the bordering Country be∣twixt France and Savoy, a sort of Pears, (whose name I now remember not,) which being kept for some hours in a moderate heat, in a Vessel exactly closed, with embers and ashes above and beneath them, will be re∣duced to a juicy Substance of a love∣ly red colour, and very sweet and lushious to the tast. Many other sorts Page  34 of Fruit in other Countries, if they were handled after the same way, or otherwise skilfully wrought on by a moderate heat, would admit as great alterations in point of tast. Neither is that sort of Pear to be here omit∣ted, which by meer Compression, duly ordered, without external heat, will in a few minutes be brought to exchange its former hardness and harshness for so yielding a Contex∣ture and pleasant a tast, as I could not but think very remarkable. And that even more solid and stubborn Salts than those of Vegetables, may have the sharpness and piercingness of their tasts very much taken off by the bare internal action of one part upon the other, without the addition of any sweetning body, I have been induced to think by having found, upon trial, that, by the help of insi∣pid Water, we may, without any vi∣olence of Fire, reduce Sea-salt into a Brine of so mild and peculiar (I had almost said) pleasant a tast, that one would scarce suspect what it had Page  35 been, or believe that so great a change of a Mineral body could be effected by so slight an intestine Com∣motion as indeed produced it; espe∣cially, since the alteration of tasts was not the most considerable that was produced by this Operation.
As to Liquours that come from Vegetables, the emerging of new Sa∣pors upon the intestine Commotion of the saporifick parts, as Consequen∣ces of such Commotions, is more obvious than is commonly considered in the juice of Grapes, which, from a sweet and spiritless Liquour, do by that internal motion we call Fer∣mentation, acquire that pleasing pun∣gency and briskness of tast that be∣longs to Wine, and afterwards dege∣nerates into that acid and cutting tast that is proper to Vinegar; and all this, by a change of Constitution made by the action of the parts them∣selves on one another, without the help of any external additament.
FINIS.
Page  [unnumbered]Page  [unnumbered]Page  [unnumbered]
EXPERIMENTS, AND OBSERVATIONS, About the Mechanical Production OF ODOURS. By the Honourable ROBERT BOYLE Esq; Fellow of the R. Society.
LONDON,•rinted by E. Flesher, for R. Davis Bookseller in Oxford. 1675.
Page  [unnumbered]Page  3
EXPERIMENTS, AND OBSERVATIONS, About the Mechanical Production OF ODOURS.
SInce Tasts and Odours (perhaps by reason of the nearness of the Organs they affect) are wont, by Physical Writers, to be treated of next to one another, I also shall imi∣tate them in handling those two Qua∣lities, not onely for the intimated Reason, but because, what I have premised in general, and some other things that I have said already under the Title of Tasts, being applicable Page  4 to Odours also, 'twill not be necessa∣ry, and therefore 'twould be tedious, to repeat them here.
EXPER. I.
With two Bodies, neither of them odo∣rous, to produce immediately a strong Ʋrinous smell.
TAke good Quick-lime and Sal Armoniac, and rub or grind them well together, and holding your Nose to the mixture, you will be saluted with an Urinous smell produced by the particles of the vo∣latil Salt, united by this operation, which will also invade your Eyes, and make them to water.
Page  5
EXPER. II.
By the bare addition of common Water, to produce immediately a very strong smell in a Body that had no such smell before.
THis is one of the Phaenomena of an Experiment made with Camphire and Oil of Vitriol, which I have elsewhere mentioned to ano∣ther purpose. For, if in that cor∣rosive Menstruum you dissolve a good proportion, but not too much, of the strongly sented Gum, the odour of the Camphire will be quite concealed in the mixture; but if you pour this mixture into a good quantity of fair Water, the dissolved Gum will im∣mediately recover out of the Men∣struum, and smell as strong as before, if not (by reason of the warmth pro∣duced in the Operation) more strongly.
Page  6
EXPER. III.
Of producing some Odours, each of them quite differing from that of any of the Ingredients.
HAving taken two ounces (or parts) of clear Oil of Turpen∣tine, and mixt it with one ounce (or part) of Oil of Vitriol, (which must be done by degrees, for otherwise the Vessel will be endangered,) the clear Liquour that came over, upon the distillation of the mixture in a Sand-furnace, in stead of the odour of Turpentine, (for the Oil of Vitriol alone is wont to be inodorous,) smelt very strong of Sulphur; insomuch that once, when I shewed this Expe∣riment, approaching my Nose very boldly and hastily to the Receiver newly severed from the Retort, the sulphureous stink proved so strong, that it had almost (to speak with the vulgar) taken away my breath. And to illustrate yet farther the possible Page  7 emergency of such odours upon the mixture of Ingredients, as neither of them was apart endowed with, we caused the substance that remained behind in the Retort (in the form of a thin extract) after one of the new∣ly mentioned Distillations to be far∣ther pressed by a stronger fire, which forced most of it over, partly in the form of a thick Oil, and partly in that of Butter; both which we keep together in the same Vial, because their odour is neither that of Oil of Turpentine, nor that of Brimstone, but they smell exceedingly like the distilled Oil of Bees-wax.
EXPER. IV.
About the production of some Odours by Local motion.
I Shall not now examine, whether the Local motion of an external Agent may not, without materially concurring to the operation, pro∣duce, Page  8 by agitating and shuffling the parts, odorous corpuscles: But that the celerity and other modifications of the Local motion of the effluvia of Bodies may not onely serve to diver∣sifie their odours, but so far produce them, as to make them perceptible by the sense, which otherwise would not be so, may be gathered from some observations, which, being obvious, are not so proper for this place. Wherefore I shall rather take notice, that I know several Bodies that are not onely inodorous when cold, but when considerably hot, and are fixt in the fire, and yet, by having their parts put into a peculiar kind of agi∣tation, will presently grow plainly odorous. On this occasion I shall add, that, as there are some very hard Woods, that acquire a strong smell by the motion they may be exposed to in a Turner's Lath, (as I have ob∣served by trialls particularly made with the hard and ponderous Lignum Vitae,) so some afford, whilst the ope∣ration lasts, an unexpected odour. Page  9 And having inquired about this mat∣ter of two eminent Artists, (whom I often employ,) concerning the odour of Beech-wood whilst it is turning, they both agreed, that it would emit well-sented effluviums. And one of them affirmed to me farther, that, ha∣ving bought a great block of that Wood, to make divers pieces of workmanship with it, when he came to turn it, there would issue out not onely a copious odour, but of such a peculiar fragrancy, that one that knew not whence it proceeded would have concluded he was smelling Roses.
EXPER. V.
By mixing a good proportion of a very strongly sented Body with an almost inodorous one, to deprive it speedi∣ly of all its smell.
TAke Salt of Tartar, and drop upon it either Spirit of Nitre or Aqua fortis not too much de∣phlegmed, Page  10 till all the effervescence cease, and the Liquour will no longer work upon the Alkali. These, by a slow Evaporation of the superfluous moisture, may be made to shoot into Crystalls like those of Nitre, which, after you have (if need be) by rub∣bing them with a dried cloath, freed them from loose adhering Corpu∣scles, will emulate Salt-peter, as in other Qualities, so in its not being o∣dorous; though, if you distill them, or burn them on kindled coals, their fumes will quickly make you sen∣sible, that they abounded with the stinking Spirits, that make Aqua fortis so offensive to the smell.
Page  11
EXPER. VI.
By putting a very strongly stinking Body to another of a not sweet smell, to produce a mixture of a pleasant and strongly Aromatick odour.
WHat is here proposed is per∣formed at the same time that the Eleventh of the foregoing Expe∣riments of Tasts is made. For the Liquour thereby produced, if it be well prepared, has not onely a spicy tast, but also a kind of Aromatick and pleasant smell; and I have some now by me, that, though kept not over-carefully, does, after some years, retain much of its former o∣dour, though not so much as of its tast.
Page  12
EXPER. VII.
By digesting two Bodies, neither of them well sented, to produce Bodies of a very subtile and strongly fragrant odour.
WE took a pound (for instance) of Spanish Wine, and put to it some ounces of Oil of Vitriol; then, keeping them for a reasonable time in digestion, we obtained, as we expected, a mixture odoriferous e∣nough. But this Triall you will find improved by that which insues.
Page  13
EXPER. VIII.
By the bare addition of a Body almost inodorous, and not well sented, to give a pleasant and Aromatick smell to Spirit of Wine.
THis we have several times done, by the ways elsewhere related for another scope, the summ of which, as far as it needs be mentioned in this place, is this.
We took good Oil of blew Vitriol (that was brought from Dantzick,) though the very common will serve well, and having put to it, by de∣grees, an equal weight of Spirit of Wine totally inflammable, we dige∣sted them together, for two, three, or four weeks, (sometimes much longer, and then with better success;) from which, when we came to distill the mixture, we had a very fragrant Spirit, which was sometimes so sub∣tile, that, though distilled in a tall Glass with a gentle Heat, it would Page  14 (in spite of our care to secure the closeness of the Vessels at the jun∣ctures) pierce through, and fill the Laboratory with a perfume, which, though men could not guess what bo∣dy afforded it, yet they could not but wonder at it. Whence we may learn, both how much those spirituous and inflammable particles, the Chy∣mists call the vegetable Sulphur of Wine, may work on and ennoble a mineral Sulphur; (for, that such an one there is in Oil of Vitriol, I have elsewhere proved by experience;) and how much the new Commistions and Contextures made by digestion may alter the odours of Bodies, whe∣ther Vegetable or Mineral. That also another Constitution of the same matter, without any manifest addition or recess of particles, may proceed to exhibit a very differing smell, will appear by the following Triall.
Page  15
EXPER. IX.
To make the forementioned fragrant Body, without addition or fire, de∣generate into the rank smell of Garlick.
TO make out this, I need onely relate, that I have more than once put the above mentioned fra∣grant Liquour in stopt Glasses, whereof the one, and not the other, stood in a warm place, till in process of time I found that odoriferous Liquour so to degenerate in point of sent, that one would have thought it to have been strongly infected with Garlick. And the like unpleasant Smell I observed in a certain Oil made of Vegetable and Mineral Sub∣stances distilled together.
And on this occasion I will add, (though not as an Argument,) this Observation, which though I shall not undertake it will always succeed, I think may not impertinently be set Page  16 down in this place, partly because of the likeness of the odour produced, to that which was the effect of the last named Triall; and partly (or ra∣ther chiefly) because it may shew us, that a Body, which it self is not onely inodorous, but very fixt, may yet, in some cases, have a great stroke in the Phaenomena of Odours; whether by being wrought on by, and some∣times mingled with, the parts of the odorous body, and thereby giving it a new modification, I shall not now stay to enquire.
We took then good Salt of Tartar, and put to it several times its weight of the expressed juice of Onions; we kept them in a light digestion for a day or two, and then unstopping the Vial, we found the former smell of the Onions quite degenerated into a rank smell of Garlick, as was judged, even when fresh juice of Garlick was procured to compare them. To va∣ry this Experiment, we made with fixt Salts, and some other strongly sented Juices, Trialls, whose events Page  17 'twould perhaps be tedious here to relate.
EXPER. X.
With an inodorous Body, and another not well-sented, to produce a muskie smell.
THis we have sometimes done by casting into Spirit (not Oil) of Vitriol a large proportion of small Pearls unbroken. For the action of the acid Menstruum upon these being moderated, partly by the weakness of the Menstruum, and partly by the intireness of the Pearls, the dissolution would sometimes last many hours. Holding from time to time my nose to the open orifice of the Glass, 'twas easie to perceive a pleasant muskie smell, which also o∣thers, to whom I mentioned it, took notice of as well as I. And, if I misremember not, I took notice of the like smell, upon Pearls not onely Page  18 dissolved in Spirit of Vinegar, but in another Liquour that had but a bad sent of its own. The foregoing Ex∣periment calls to my mind that which follows.
EXPER. XI.
With fixt Metals, and Bodies either in∣odorous or stinking, to produce strong and pleasant smells, like those of some Vegetables and Minerals.
THat Gold is too fixt a body to emit any odour, and that A∣qua Regis has an odour that is very strong and offensive, I think will be easily granted. But yet Aurum ful∣minans being made (as 'tis known) by precipitating with the inodorous Oil of Tartar the Solution made of the former in the latter, and this Precipitate being to be farther pro∣ceeded with in order to another Ex∣periment; we fulminated it per se in a Silver Vessel like that, but bet∣ter Page  19 contrived, that is (if I misremem∣ber not) somewhere described by Glauberus. And among other Phae∣nomena of this operation, that belong not to this place, we observed with pleasure, that, when the fulmination was recently made, the steams, which were afforded by the metal that had been fired, were endowed with a de∣lightful smell, not unlike that of musk. From which Experiment and the foregoing we may learn, that Art, by lucky Contextures, may imitate the odours that are presumed to be natural and specifick; and that Mi∣neral and Vegetable Substances may compound a smell that is thought to be peculiar to Animals.
And as Art sometimes imitates Na∣ture in the production of Odours, as may be confirmed by what is above related concerning counterfeit Ras∣berry-Wine, wherein those that drank it be∣lieved they did not onely tast,* but smell the Ras∣berry; so sometimes Nature seems Page  20 to imitate her self, in giving like o∣dours to bodies extreamly differing. For, not yet to dismiss the smell of Musk, there is a certain Seed, which, for the affinity of its odour to that perfume, they call the Musk-seed; and indeed, having some of it presented me by a Gentleman, that had newly brought it from the West-Indies, I found it, whilst 'twas fresh, to have a fragrancy suitable to the name that was given it. There is also a sort of Rats in Muscovy, whose skins, whereof I have seen several, have a smell that has procured them the name of Musk-Rats. To which I know not, whether we may not add the mention of a certain sort of Ducks, which some call Musk-Ducks, because at a certain season of the year, if they be chaf'd by violent motion, they will under the wing emit a musky in stead of a sweaty sent; which upon trial I perceived to be true. On the other side, I have known a certain Wood growing in the Indies, which, especially when the sent is excited by Page  21 rubbing, stinks so rankly and so like Paracelsus's Zibetum Occidentale, (stercus Humanum,) that one would swear it were held under his Nose. And since I have been speaking of good sents produced by unlikely means, I shall not pretermit this Ob∣servation, that, though generally the fire impresses a strong offensive smell, which Chymists therefore call Em∣pyreumatical, upon the odorous bo∣dies that it works strongly on; yet the constitution of a body may be such, that the new Contexture that is made of its parts, even by the vi∣olence of the fire, shall be fit to af∣ford Effluviums rather agreeable to the organs of smelling, than any way offensive. For I remember, that, ha∣ving for a certain purpose distilled Saccharum Saturni in a Retort with a strong fire, I then obtained, (for I dare not undertake for the like suc∣cess to every Experimenter,) besides a piercing and Empyreumatical Li∣quour that was driven over into the Receiver, a good Lump of a Caput Page  22 Mortuum of a grayish colour, which, notwithstanding the strong impressi∣on it had received from the fire, was so far from having any Empyreuma∣tical sent, that it had a pleasing one, and when 'twas broken, smelt almost like a fine Cake new baked, and bro∣ken whilst yet warm. And as the fire, notwithstanding the Empyreuma it is wont to give to almost all the bodies it burns, may yet be reduced to confer a good smell on some of them, if they be fitted upon such a contexture of their parts to emit steams of such a nature, (whatever were the efficient cause of such a con∣texture;) so we observe in the Musk animal, that Nature in that Cat, or rather Deer, (though it properly be∣long to neither kind,) produces Musk by such a change, as is wont in other Animals to produce a putrefactive stink. So that, provided a due con∣stitution of parts be introduced into a portion of matter, it may on that account be endowed with noble and desirable Sents, or other Qualities, Page  23 though that Constitution were intro∣duced by such unlikely means, as Combustion and Putrefaction them∣selves. In Confirmation of which, I shall subjoyn in the insuing account a notable, though casual, Phaenome∣non, that occurr'd to a couple of Virtuosi of my Acquaintance.
An eminent Professor of Mathe∣maticks affirmed to me, that, chan∣cing one day in the heat of Summer with another Mathematician (who I remember was present when this was told) to pass by a large Dunghil that was then in Lincolns-Inn-fields, when they came to a certain distance from it, they were both of them surprized to meet with a very strong smell of Musk, (occasioned, probably, by a certain degree or a peculiar kind of Putrefaction,) which each was for a while shy of taking notice of, for fear his Companion should have laughed at him for it; but, when they came much nearer the Dunghill, that pleasing smell was succeeded by a stink proper to such a heap of Ex∣crements. Page  24 This puts me in mind of adding, that, though the excrements of Animals, and particularly their sweat, are usually foetid; yet, that 'tis not the nature of an excrement, but the constitutions, that usually belong to them, make them so, hath seemed probable to me upon some Observations. For, not to mention, what is related of Alexander the Great, I knew a Gentleman of a very happy Temperature of body, whose sweat, upon a critical exami∣nation, wherein I made use also of a surprize, I found to be fragrant; which was confirmed also by some Learned men of my acquaintance, and particularly a Physician that lay with him.
Though Civet usually passes for a Perfume, and as such is wont to be bought at a great rate; yet it seems to be but a clammy excrement of the A∣nimal that affords it, which is secreted into Bags provided by Nature to receive it. And I the rather men∣tion Civet, because it usually affords Page  25 a Phaenomenon that agrees very well with the Mechanical Doctrine con∣cerning Odours, though it do not de∣monstrate it. For, when I have had the curiosity to visit divers of those Civet-Cats, (as they call them) though they have heads liker Foxes than Cats; I observed, that a certain de∣gree of Laxity (if I may so style it) of the odorous Atmosphere was requisite to make the smell fragrant. For, when I was near the Cages, where many of them were kept to∣gether, or any great Vessel full of Civet, the smell (probably by the plenty, and perhaps the over-brisk motion of the effluvia,) was rather rank and offensive than agreeable; whereas, when I removed into the next room, or to some other conve∣nient distance, the steams (being less crowded, and farther from their foun∣tain,) presented themselves to my Nostrills under the notion of a Per∣fume.
And, not to dismiss this our Eleventh Experiment without touching once Page  26 more upon Musk, I shall add, that an Ingenious Lady, to whom I am near∣ly related, shewed me an odd Monkey, that had been presented her as a ra∣rity by the then Admiral of England, and told me, among other things, that she had observed in it, that, being sick, he would seek for Spiders as his pro∣per remedies, for some of which he then seemed to be looking, and thereby gave her occasion to tell me this; which when he had eaten, the alteration it made in him would sometimes fill the room with a musky sent: But he had not the good luck to light on any whilst my visit lasted.
EXPER. XII.
To heighten good smells by Composi∣tion.
'TIS well known to Perfumers, and is easie to be observed, that Amber-greece alone, though e∣steemed the best and richest perfume Page  27 that is yet known in the world, has but a very faint and scarce a pleasant sent. And I remember, that I have seen some hundreds of ounces toge∣ther newly brought from the East-Indies; but if I had not been before acquainted with the smell of Amber-greece alone, and had had onely the vulgar conceit of it, that 'tis the best and strongest of perfumes, my Nostrills would scarce have made me suspect those lumps to have been any thing a-kin to Amber-greece. But if a due proportion of Musk, or even Civet, be dexterously mixt with Am∣ber, the latent fragrancy, though it be thereby somewhat compounded, will quickly be called forth, and ex∣ceedingly heightned. And indeed 'tis not, as 'tis commonly presumed, the plenty of the richest Ingredients, as Amber-greece and Musk, but the just proportion and skilful mixture of them, that makes the noblest and most lasting perfume, of which I have had sufficient experience; so that with a far less quantity of Musk Page  28 and Amber, than not onely ordinary persons, but Perfumers themselves are wont to imploy, we have had se∣veral Perfumes, that for fragrancy were much preferred to those where Musk and Amber-greece are so plen∣tifully imployed. The proportions and ways of mixture we best appro∣ved of, would be too long, and are not necessary, to be here set down; but you will not much erre in making use of such a proportion as this, viz. eight parts of Amber-greece, two of Musk, and one of Civet: which quantities of Ingredients if they be skilfully and exactly mingled, you will not miss of a good Composition, with which you may innoble other materials, as Benzoin, Storax, sweet Flowers, &c. fit to make Pastills, Ointments for Leather, Poman∣der, &c. And we may here add, that, upon the score of the new Tex∣ture acquired by Composition, some things, that are not fragrant them∣selves, may yet much heighten the fragrancy of Odoriferous bodies. Page  29 And of liquid perfumes I remember, 'twas the secret of some Court-La∣dies, noted for Curiosity about per∣fumes, to mingle always a due pro∣portion of Wine-vinegar with the odoriferous Ingredients. And on this occasion, to shew the power of mixtures in improving Odours, I shall add something about a Liquour of mine, that has had the good fortune to be very favourably spoken of by persons of Quality accustomed to choice Perfumes. This Liquour; though thought an elaborate prepa∣ration, as well for another reason, as to recommend it to some, whose Critical palates can tast the very titles of things, I called it Essence of Musk, is indeed a very plain simple preparation, which I thus make.
I take an arbitrary Quantity of choice Musk without finely powde∣ring it, and pour upon it about a finger's breadth of pure Spirit of Wine; these in a Glass closely stopt I set in a quiet place to digest, with∣out the help of any Furnace, and Page  30 after some days, or a few weeks, (ac∣cording as Circumstances determi∣ned,) the Spirit, which is some∣what odd, will in the cold have made a solution of the finest parts of the Musk, and will be thereby much tinged, but not of a red colour. This Liquour being decanted, I keep by it self as the richest of all; and pour a like quantity of Spirit on the remaining Musk, which u∣sually will in the cold, though more slowly, draw a tincture, but fainter than the former, which being pou∣red off, the remaining Musk may be imployed for inferiour uses. Now that which made me mention this Pre∣paration as pertinent to our present Subject, is this Phaenomenon of it, that the first essence, or rather tin∣cture, being smelt to by it self, has but a faint, and not very pleasing, o∣dour of Musk, so that every body would not discover that there was Musk in it; but if a single drop, or two drops at most, were mixt with a pint, or perhaps a quart, of good Sack, Page  31 the whole body of the Wine would presently acquire a considerably mu∣sky sent, and be so richly perfumed both as to tast and smell, as seemed strange enough to those that knew the vast disproportion of the Ingre∣dients.
FINIS.
Page  [unnumbered]Page  [unnumbered]
OF THE IMPERFECTION OF THE Chymist's DOCTRINE OF QUALITIES. By the Honourable ROBERT BOYLE Esq; Fellow of the R. Society.
LONDON, Printed by E. Flesher, for R. Davis Bookseller in Oxford. 1675.
Page  [unnumbered]Page  3OF THE IMPERFCTION OF The Chymist's Doctrine OF QUALITIES.
CHAP. I.
SInce a great part of those Lear∣ned Men, especially Physicians, who have discerned the defects of the vulgar Philosophy, but are not yet come to understand and re∣lish the Corpuscularian, have slid into the Doctrine of the Chymists; and since the Spagyrists are wont to pre∣tend to make out all the Qualities of bodies from the Predominancy of some one of their three Hypostatical Page  4 Principles, I suppose it may both keep my opinion from appearing too pre∣sumptuous, and (which is far more considerable) may make way for the fairer Reception of the Mechanical Hypothesis about Qualities, if I here intimate (though but briefly and in general) some of those defects, that I have observed in Chymists Explica∣tions of Qualities.
And I might begin with taking no∣tice of the Obscurity of those Prin∣ciples, which is no small defect in Notions whose proper office it should be to conduce to the illustration of others. For, how can that facilitate the understanding of an obscure Quality or Phaenomenon which is it self scarcely intelligible, or at least needs almost as much explanation as the thing 'tis designed & pretended to explicate? Now a man need not be very conversant in the writings of Chymists to observe, in how Laxe, Indefinite, and almost Arbitrary Sen∣ses they employ the Terms of Salt, Sulphur and Mercury; of which I Page  5 could never find that they were a∣greed upon any certain Definitions or setled Notions; not onely diffe∣ring Authors, but not unfrequently one and the same, and perhaps in the same Brook, employing them in ve∣ry differing senses. But I will not give the Chymists any rise to pretend, that the chief fault that I find with their Hypothesis is but verbal; though that it self may not a little blemish any Hypothesis, one of the first of whose Requisites ought to be Clear∣ness; and therefore I shall now ad∣vance and take notice of defects that are manifestly of another kind.
And first the Doctrine that all their Theory is grounded on, seems to me Inevident and undemonstrated, not to say precarious. It is somewhat strange to me, that neither the Spa∣gyrists themselves, nor yet their Ad∣versaries, should have taken notice, that Chymists have rather supposed than evinced, that the Analysis of bo∣dies by fire, or even that at least some Analysis is the onely instrument of in∣vestigating Page  6 what Ingredients mixt bo∣dies are made up of, since in divers cases That may be discovered by Composition as well as by Resoluti∣on; as it may appear, that Vitriol con∣sists of metalline parts (whether Mar∣tial, or Venereal, or both) associa∣ted by Coagulation with acid ones, one may, I say, discover this as well by making true Vitriol with Spirit (improperly called Oil) of Sulphur, or that of Salt, as by distilling or Re∣solving Vitriol by the fire.
But I will not here enlarge on this subject, nor yet will I trouble you with what I have largely discoursed in the Sceptical Chymist, to call in que∣stion the grounds on which Chymists assert, that all mixt bodies are com∣pounded of Salt, Sulphur, and Mer∣cury. For it may suffice me now to tell you, that, whatsoever they may be able to obtain from other bodies, it does not appear by Experience, which is the grand, if not the onely, Argument they rely on, that all mixt bodies that have Qualities, consist of Page  7 their tria prima, since they have not been able, that we know, truly, and without new Compositions, to re∣solve into those three, either Gold, or Silver, or Crystal, or Venetian Talck, or some other bodies, that I elsewhere name; & yet these bodies are en∣dowed with divers Qualities, as the two former with Fusibleness and Malleability, and all of them with Weight and Fixity; so that in these and the like bodies, whence Chymists have not made it yet appear, that their Salt, Sulphur and Mercury, can be truly and adequately separated, 'twill scarce be other than precarious, to derive the malleableness, colour, and other Qualities of such bodies from those Principles.
Under this Head I consider also, that a great part of the Chymical Doctrine of Qualities is bottom'd on, or supposes, besides their newly que∣stioned Analysis by fire, some other things, which, as far as I know, have not yet been well proved, and I que∣stion whether they ever will be.
Page  8 One of their main Suppositions is, that this or that Quality must have its 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉, as Sennertus, the Learnedst Champion of this opinion, calls it, or some particular material Principle, to the participation of which, as of the primary native and genuine subject, all other bodies must owe it: But upon this point having purposely discoursed elsewhere, I shall now onely observe, that, not to mention Local motion and Figure, I think 'twill be hard to shew, what is the 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 of Gravity, Vola∣tility, Heat, Sonorousness, Transpa∣rency and Opacity, which are Qua∣lities to be indifferently met with in bodies whether simple or mixt.
And whereas the Spagyrists are wont to argue, that, because this or that Quality is not to be derived truly from this or that particular Principle, as Salt, for instance, and Mercury; therefore it must needs be derivable from the third, as Sulphur. This way of arguing involves a farther Sup∣position than that newly examined. Page  9 For it implies, that every Quality in a compounded body must arise from some one of the tria prima, whereas experience assures us, that bodies may, by Composition, obtain Quali∣ties, that were not to be found in any of the separate Ingredients. As we see in painting, that though blew and yellow be neither of them green, yet their mixture will be so. And though no single Sound will make an octave or diapason; yet two sounds, whose proportion is double, will have an eighth. And Tinn and Copper mel∣ted and mingled together in a due proportion, will make a bell-metal far more sonorous than either of them was before. 'Tis obvious enough for Chymists themselves to observe, that, though Lead be an insipid body, and Spirit of Vinegar a very sharp one, yet Saccharum Saturni, that is compounded out of these two, has a sweetness that makes it not ill de∣serve its name.
But this ill-grounded Supposition of the Chymists, is extended farther Page  10 in an usual Topic of theirs, according to which they conclude, That I know not how many Qualities, as well ma∣nifest as occult, must be explicated by their tria prima, because they are not explicable by the four elements of the Peripateticks. To make which argumentation valid, it must be pro∣ved, (which I fear it will never be) that there are no other wayes, by which those Qualities may be expli∣cated, but by a determinate number of Material Principles, whether four or three: Besides that, till they have shewn that such Qualities may be in∣telligibly explicated by their Prin∣ciples, the objection will lye as strong for the Aristotelians against them, as for them against the Aristotelians.
CHAP. II.
NExt I consider, that there are divers Qualities even in mixt bodies, wherein it does not appear, that the use of the Chymical Doctrine Page  11 is Necessary. As, for instance, when pure Gold is by Heat onely brought to fusion, and consequently to the state of fluidity, and upon the remis∣sion of that heat, grows a solid and consistent body again, what addition or expulsion or change of any of the tria prima does appear to be the cause of this change of consistence? Which is easie to be accounted for according to the Mechanical way, by the vehe∣ment agitation that the fire makes of the minute parts of the Gold to bring it to fusion; and the cohesion of those parts, by vertue of their gravity and fitness to adhere to one another, when that agitation ceases. When Venice Glass is meerly by being bea∣ten to pouder deprived of its Trans∣parency and turned into a body opa∣cous and white, what need or use of the tria prima have we in the expli∣cation of this Phaenomenon? Or of that other which occurs, when by barely melting down this white and opacous body it is deprived of its opacity and colour, and becomes Page  12 diaphanous? And of this sort of In∣stances you will meet with divers in the following Notes about particular Qualities; for which reason I shall forbear the mention of them here.
CHAP. III.
I Observe too, that the Spagyrical Doctrine of Qualities is Insuffici∣ent and too narrow to reach to all the Phaenomena or even to all the notable ones, that ought to be ex∣plicable by them. And this Insuffici∣ency I find to be two-fold; for, first, there are divers Qualities, of which Chymists will not so much as attempt to give us explications, and of other particular Qualities the explications, such as they are that they give us, are often very deficient and unsatis∣factory; and do not sometimes so much as take notice of divers consi∣derable Phaenomena that belong to the Qualities whereof they pretend to give an account; of which you Page  13 will meet with divers Instances in the insuing Notes. And therefore I shall onely, (to declare my meaning the better,) invite you to observe with me, that though Gold be the body they affect to be most conversant with; yet it will be very hard to shew, how the specific weight of Gold can be deduced from any or all of the three Principles, since Mercury it self, that is of bodies, known to us, the heaviest next to Gold, is so much lighter than Gold, that, whereas I have usually found Mercury to be to an equal weight of water, somewhat, though little, less than fourteen to one, I find pure Gold to be about nineteen times as heavy as so much water. Which will make it very dif∣ficult, not to say impossible for them to explain, how Gold should barely by participating of Mercury, which is a body much lighter than it self, ob∣tain that great specific gravity we find it to have; for the two other Hypostatical Principles, we know, are far lighter than Mercury. And I Page  14 think it would much puzzle the Chy∣mists, to give us any examples of a compounded body, that is specifical∣ly heavier than the heaviest of the Ingredients that it is made up of. And this is the first kind of Insufficiency I was taking notice of in the Chymical Doctrine of Qualities.
The other is, That there are seve∣ral bodies which the most Learned among themselves confess not to con∣sist of their tria prima, and yet are in∣dowed with Qualities, which conse∣quently are not in those subjects to be explicated by the tria prima which are granted not to be found in them. Thus elementary Water, though never so pure, (as distilled Rain-water,) has fluidity and coldness and humidi∣ty and transparency and volatility, without having any of the tria prima. And the purest Earth, as Ashes care∣fully freed from the fixt salt, has gra∣vity and consistence and dryness and colour and fixity, without owing them either to Salt, Sulphur, or Mer∣cury; not to mention, that there are Page  15 Celestial bodies which do not ap∣pear, nor are wont to be pretended, to consist of the tria prima, that yet are indowed with Qualities. As the Sun has Light, and as many Philoso∣phers think, Heat, and Colour; and the Moon has a determinate consi∣stence and figuration, (as appears by her mountains) and Astronomers ob∣serve, that the higher Planets and e∣ven the Fixt stars appear to be dif∣feringly coloured. But I shall not multiply Instances of this kind, be∣cause what I have said, may not one∣ly serve for my present purpose, but bring a great Confirmation to what I lately said, when I noted, that the Chymical Principles were in many cases not necessary to explicate Qua∣lities: For since in Earth, Water, &c. such diffused Qualities, as gravity, fixtness, colour, transparency and fluidity, must be acknowledged not to be derived from the tria prima; 'tis plain, that portions of matter may be endowed with such Qualities by other causes and agents than Salt, Page  16 Sulphur and Mercury. And then why should we deny, that also in compounded bodies those Qualities may be (sometimes at least) produ∣ced by the same or the like Causes? As we see, that the reduction of a diaphanous Solid to pouder, produ∣ces whiteness, whether the commi∣nution happens to Rock-crystal or to Venice glass, or to Ice: The first of which is acknowledged to be a natural and perfectly mixt body; the second a factitious and not onely mixt but decompounded body; and the last, for ought appears, an ele∣mentary body, or at most very slight∣ly and imperfectly mixt. And so by mingling Air in small portions with a diaphanous Liquor, as we do when we beat such a Liquor into foam, a whiteness is produced, as well in pure Water, which is acknowledged to be a simple body, as in white Wine, which is reckoned among perfectly mixt bodies.
Page  17
CHAP. IV.
I Further observe, that the Chymists Explications do not reach deep and far enough. For first, most of them are not sufficiently distinct and full, so as to come home to the parti∣cular Phaenomena, nor often times so much as to all the grand ones, that belong to the History of the Quali∣ties they pretend to explicate▪ You will readily believe, that a Chymist will not easily make out by his Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury, why a Load∣stone capp'd with steel may be made to take up a great deal more Iron, sometimes more than eight or ten times as much, than if it be immediat∣ly applied to the iron; or why, if one end of the Magnetic Needle is di∣spos'd to be attracted by the North∣pole, for instance, of the Load-stone, the other Pole of the Load-stone will not attract it but drive it away: or, why a bar or rod of iron, being heated red-hot and cooled perpendi∣cularly, Page  18 will with its lower end drive away the flower de Luce, or the North-end of a Marriners Needle, which the upper end of the same barr or rod will not repell but draw to it. In short, of above threescore Pro∣perties or notable Phaenomena of Magnetic Bodies, that some Writers have reckon'd up, I do not remember that any three have been by Chymists so much as attempted to be solved by their three Principles. And even in those Qualities, in whose explicati∣ons these Principles may more pro∣bably than elsewhere pretend to have a place, the Spagyrists accounts are wont to fall so short of being distinct and particular enough, that they use to leave divers considerable Phaeno∣mena untouch'd, and do but very lamely or slightly explicate the more obvious or familiar. And I have so good an opinion of divers of the em∣bracers of the Spagyrical Theory of Qualities (among whom I have met with very Learned and worthy men) that I think, that if a Quality being Page  19 pos'd to them, they were at the same time presented with a good Cata∣logue of the Phaenomena, that they may take, in the History of it, as it were with one view, they would plainly perceive that there are more particulars to be accounted for, than at first they were aware of; and di∣vers of them such, as may quite dis∣courage considering men from taking upon them to explain them all by the Tria prima, and oblige them to have recourse to more Catholic and com∣prehensive Principles. I know not, whether I may not add on this occasi∣on, that, methinks, a Chymist, who by the help of his Tria Prima, takes upon him to interpret that Book of Nature of which the Qualities of bo∣dies make a great part, acts at but a little better rate than he, that seeing a great book written in a Cypher, whereof he were acquainted but with three Letters, should undertake to decypher the whole piece. For though 'tis like, he would in many words find one of the Letters of his Page  20 short key, and in divers words two of them, and perhaps in some all three; yet, besides that in most of the words wherein the known Let∣ter or Letters may be met with, they may be so blended with other un∣known Letters as to keep him from decyphering a good part of those ve∣ry words, 'tis more than probable, that a great part of the book would consist of words wherein none of his three Letters were to be found.
CHAP. V.
AND this is the first account, on which I observe that the Chy∣mical Theory of Qualities does not reach far enough: But there is ano∣ther branch of its deficiency. For even, when the explications seem to come home to the Phaenomena, they are not primary, and, if I may so speak, Fontal enough. To make this Page  21 appear, I shall at present imploy but these two Considerations. The first is, that those substances themselves, that Chymists call their Principles, are each of them indowed with seve∣ral Qualities. Thus Salt is a consi∣stent, not a fluid, body; it has its weight, 'tis dissoluble in water, is ei∣ther diaphanous or opacous, fixt or volatile, sapid or insipid; (I speak thus disjunctively, because Chymists are not all agreed about these things; and it concerns not my Argument, which of the disputable Qualities be resolved upon.) And Sulphur, ac∣cording to them, is a body fusible, in∣flammable, &c. and, according to Ex∣perience, is consistent, heavy, &c. So that 'tis by the help of more primary and general Principles, that we must explicate some of those Qualities, which being found in bodies, suppo∣sed to be perfectly similar or homo∣geneous, cannot be pretended to be derived in one of them from the o∣ther. And to say, that 'tis the nature of a Principle to have this or that Page  22 Quality, as, for instance, of Sulphur to be susible, and therefore we are not to exact a Reason why it is so; though I could say much by way of answer, I shall now only observe, that this Argument is grounded but upon a supposition, and will be of no force, if from the primary affections of bo∣dies one may deduce any good Me∣chanical Explication of Fusibility in the general, without necessarily sup∣posing such a Primigeneal Sulphur, as the Chymists fancy, or deriving it from thence in other bodies. And indeed, since not only Salt-peter, Sea salt, Vitriol and Allum, but Salt of Tartar, and the Volatile Salt of Urine are all of them fusible; I do not well see, how Chymists can derive the fu∣sibleness even of Salts obtained by their own analysis (such as Salt of Tartar and of Urine) from the par∣ticipation of the Sulphureous Ingredi∣ent; especially since, if such an at∣tempt should be made, it would over∣throw the Hypothesis of three Simple bodies, whereof they will have all Page  23 mixt ones to be compounded; and still 'twould remain to be explicated, upon what account the Principle, that is said to endow the other with such a Quality, comes to be endowed therewith it self. For 'tis plain, that a mass of Sulphur is not an Atomical or Adamantine body; but consists of a multitude of Corpuscles of deter∣minate Figures, and connected after a determinate manner: so that it may be reasonably demanded, why such a Convention of particles, rather than many another that does not, consti∣tutes a fusible body.
Page  24
CHAP. VI.
AND this leads me to a further Consideration, which makes me look upon the Chymists explications as not deep and radical enough; and it is this, that, when they tell us, for instance, that the fusibleness of bo∣dies proceeds from Sulphur, in case they say true, they do but tell us what material Ingredient 'tis that be∣ing mingled with and dispers'd through the other parts of a body, makes it apt to melt: But this does not intelligibly declare, what it is that makes a portion of matter fu∣sible, and how the sulphureous Ingre∣dient introduces that disposition into the rest of the mass, wherewith 'tis commixt or united. And yet 'tis such explications as these, that an inquisi∣tive Naturalist chiefly looks after, and which I therefore call Philosophical. And to shew, that there may be more Fontal explications, I shall only Page  25 observe, that, not to wander from our present instance, Sulphur it self is fusible. And therefore, as I lately intimated, Fusibility, which is not the Quality of one Atome, or Par∣ticle, but of an Aggregate of Parti∣cles, ought it self to be accounted for in that Principle, before the Fu∣sibleness of all other bodies be deri∣ved from it. And 'twill in the fol∣lowing notes appear, that in Sulphur it self that Quality may be probably deduced from the convention of Cor∣puscles of determinate shapes and sizes, contexed or connected after a convenient manner. And if either nature, or art, or chance, should bring together particles endowed with the like Mechanical Affections, and associate them after the like manner, the resulting body would be fusible, though the component particles had never been parts of the Chymists pri∣mordial sulphur: And such particles so convening might perhaps have made Sulphur it self, though before there had been no such body in the Page  26 world. And what I say to those Chymists, that make the sulphureous Ingredient the cause of fusibility, may easily, mutatis mutandis, be applied to their Hypothesis, that rather as∣cribe that quality to the Mercurial or the Saline Principle, and consequent∣ly cannot give a rational account of the fusibility of Sulphur. And there∣fore though I readily allow (as I shall have afterwards occasion to declare) that Sulphur, or an other of the tria prima, may be met with, and even a∣bound in several bodies endowed with the quality that is attributed to their participation of that Principle; yet that this may be no certain sign that the propos'd Quality must flow from that Ingredient, you may per∣haps be assisted to discern by this il∣lustration, That if Tin be duly mixt with Copper or Gold, or, as I have tried, with Silver or Iron, it will make them very brittle; and it is also an Ingredient of divers other bodies that are likewise brittle, as blew, green, white, and otherwise colour'd, Amels, Page  27 which are usually made of calcin'd Tin (which the Tradesmen call Put∣tee,) colliquated with the Ingredients of Crystal-glass and some small por∣tion of Mineral pigment. But though in all the above-named brittle bodies, Tin be a considerable Ingredient; yet 'twere very unadvised to affirm, that Brittleness in general proceeds from Tin. For provided the solid parts of consistent bodies touch one another but according to small portions of their surfaces, and be not implicated by their contexture, the Metalline or other Composition may be brittle, though there be no Tin at all in it. And in effect, the materials of glass being brought to fusion will compose a brittle body, as well when there is no Puttee colliquated with them, as when there is. Calcin'd Lead by the action of the fire may be melted into a brittle mass, and even into transpa∣rent Glass, without the help of Tin or any other additament. And I need not add, that there are a multitude of other bodies, that cannot be pretend∣ed Page  28 to owe their brittleness to any par∣ticipation of Tin, of which they have no need, if the matter they consist of wants not the requisite Mechanical Dispositions.
And here I shall venture to add, that the way employed by the Chymists, as well as the Peripateticks, of ac∣counting for things by the Ingredi∣ents, whether Elements, Principles, or other bodies, that they suppose them to consist of, will often frustrate the Naturalists expectation of events, which may frequently prove differ∣ing from what he promis'd himself, up∣on the Consideration of the Qualities of each Ingredient. For the ensuing Notes contain divers Instances, wherein there emerges a new Quality differing from, or even contrary to, any that is conspicuous in the Ingre∣dients; as two transparent bodies may make an opacous mixture, a yel∣low body and a blew, one that is green, two malleable bodies, a brittle one, two actually cold bodies, a hot Page  29 one, two fluid bodies, a consistent one, &c. And as this way of judg∣ing by material Principles hinders the foreknowledg of Events from being certain; so it much more hinders the assignation of Causes from being sa∣tisfactory; so that perhaps some would not think it very rash to say, that those who judg of all mixt bodies as Apo∣thecaries do of Medicines, barely by the Qualities and Proportions of the Ingredients (such as among the Ari∣stotelians are the four Elements, and among the Chymists the tria prima,) do, as if one should pretend to give an account of the Phaenomena and operations of Clocks and Watches, and their Diversities by this, That some are made of brass wheels, some of iron, some have plain ungilt wheels, others of wheels overlaid with Gold, some furnished with gut∣strings, others with little chains, &c. and that therefore the Qualities and Predominancies of these metalls that make parts of the Watch, ought to have ascribed to them, what indeed Page  30 flows from their Coordination and Contrivance.
CHAP. VII.
THE last defect I observe in the Chymical Doctrine of Quali∣ties, is, that in many cases it agrees not well with the Phaenomena of Nature, and that by one or both of these ways. First, there are divers changes of Qualities, wherein one may well ex∣pect, that a Chymical Principle should have a great stroak, and yet it does not at all appear to have so. He that considers, what great operations di∣vers of the Hermeticks ascribe to this or that Hypostatical Principle, and how many Qualities according to them must from it be derived, can scarce do other than expect, that a great change as to those Qualities happening in a mixt body, should at least be accompany'd with some no∣table action of, or alteration in the Page  31 Principle. And yet I have met with many instances, wherein Qualities are produced, or abolished, or very much altered, without any manifest intro∣duction, expulsion, or considerable change of the Principle, whereon that Quality is said to depend, or per∣haps of either of the two others: As when a piece of fine silver, that having been neald in the fire, and suf∣fer'd to cool leisurely, is very flexible, is made stiff and hard to bend, barely by a few stroaks of a hammer. And a string of a Lute acquires or loses a sympathy, as they call it, with another string of the same or another Instru∣ment, barely by being either stretch∣ed so as to make an Unison with it, or screw'd up or let down beyond or beneath that degree of Ten∣sion.
To multiply instances of this kind would be to anticipate those, you will hereafter meet with in their due pla∣ces. And therefore I shall pass on from the first sort of Phaenomena, that favour not the Chymical Hypothesis Page  32 about Qualities, to the other which consists of those, wherein either that does not happen which according to their Hypothesis ought to happen, or the contrary happens to what accord∣ing to their Hypothesis may justly be expected. Of this you will meet with instances hereafter; I shall now trou∣ble you but with one, the better to declare my meaning. 'Tis not un∣known to those Chymists, that work much in Silver and in Copper, that the former will endure Ignition and become red-hot in the fire, before it will be brought to fusion; and the latter is yet far more difficult to be melted down than the other; yet if you separately dissolve those two metalls in Aqua fortis, and by evapo∣ration reduce them to Crystalls, these will be brought to fusion in a very little time, and with a very mo∣derate Heat, without breaking the glasses that contain them. If you ask a vulgar Chymist the cause of this facility of fusion, he will proba∣bly tell you without scruple, that 'tis Page  33 from the saline parts of the Aqua for∣tis, which, being imbodied in the metals and of a very fusible nature, impart that easiness of fusion to the metals they are mixt with. Accor∣ding to which plausible explication one might well expect, that, if the saline Corpuscles were exquisitly mingled with Tin, they would make it far more fusible than of it self it is. And yet, as I have elsewhere noted, when I put Tin into a convenient quantity of Aqua fortis, the metal be∣ing corroded, subsided, as is usual, in the form of whites of eggs, which be∣ing well dried, the Tinn was so far from being grown more fusible by the addition of the saline particles of the Menstruum, that, whereas 'tis known that simple Tin will melt long before it come to be red-hot, this prepar'd Tin would endure for a good while not only a thorow ignition, but the blast of a pair of double bellows, (which we usually imploy'd to melt Silver and Copper it self,) without being at all brought to fusion. And Page  34 as for those Spagyrists that admit, as most of them are granted to do, that all kinds of metals may be turned into Gold by a very small proportion of what they call the Philosophers Elixir, one may I think shew them from their own concessions, that di∣vers Qualities may be changed even in such constant bodies as Metals, without the addition of any consider∣able proportion of the simple Ingre∣dients, to which they are wont to as∣cribe those Qualities; provided the Agent, (as an efficient rather than as a material Cause,) be able to make a great change in the Mechanical af∣fections of the parts whereof the metal it acts on is made up. Thus if we suppose a pound of Silver, a pound of Lead, and a pound of Iron to be transmuted into Gold, each by a grain of the powder of projection, this tinging powder, as a material Cause is inconsiderable, by reason of the smallness of its bulk, and as an effici∣ent cause it works differing and even contrary effects, according to the dis∣position, Page  35 wherein it finds the metal to be transmuted, and the changes it pro∣duces in the constituent Texture of it. Thus it brings Quick-silver to be fixt, which it was not before, and deprives it of the Fluidity which it had before; it brings Silver to be indissolvable in Aqua fortis, which readily dissolved it before, and dissoluble in Aqua Re∣gis, which before would not touch it; and which is very considerable to our present purpose, whereas it makes Iron much more fusible than Mars, it makes Lead much less fusible than whilest it retained its pristine form, since Saturn melts ere it come to ig∣nition, which Gold requires to bring it to fusion. But this is proposed only as an Argument ad hominem, till the Truth of the transmutation of metals into Gold, by way of projecti∣on, be sufficiently proved, and the circumstances and phaenomena of it particularly declared.
I must not forget to take notice, that some learned modern Chymists would be thought to explicate divers Page  36 of the Changes that happen to Bodies in point of Odours, Colours, &c. by saying that in such alterations the Sul∣phur or other Hypostatical Principle is intraverted or extraverted, or, as o∣thers speak, inverted. But I confess, to me these seem to be rather new terms then real explications. For, to omit divers of the Arguments men∣tioned in this present Treatise, that may be applied to this way of solving the Phaenomena of Qualities, one may justly object, that the supposed Ex∣traversion or Intraversion of Sulphur can by no means reach to give an ac∣count of so great a variety of Odours, Colours, and other Qualities as may be found in the changed portions of matter we are speaking of. And which is more, what they call by these and the like names, cannot be done without Local motion transposing the particles of the matter, and conse∣quently producing in it a change of Texture, which is the very thing we would infer, and which being suppo∣sed, we may grant Sulphur to be often∣times Page  37 actually present in the altered Bodies, without allowing it to be al∣ways necessary to produce the al∣terations in them, since Corpuscles so condition'd and contex'd would per∣form such Effects, whether Sulphur, as such, did, or did not, make up the subject matter of the Change.
And now I shall conclude, and part∣ly recapitulate what has been deli∣vered in this and the two foregoing Chapters, with this summary consi∣deration, That the Chymist's Salt, Sulphur and Mercury themselves are not the first and most simple Princi∣ples of Bodies, but rather primary Concretions of Corpuscles or Parti∣cles more simple than they, as being endowed only with the first, or most radical (if I may so speak) and most Catholick Affections of simple Bo∣dies, namely Bulk, Shape, and Mo∣tion, or Rest; by the different Con∣ventions or Coalitions of which mi∣nutest portions of matter are made those differing Concretions that Chymists name Salt, Sulphur and Page  38 Mercury. And to this Doctrine it will be consonant, that several Ef∣fects of this or that Spagyrical Prin∣ciple need not be derived from Salt, for instance, or Sulphur as such, but may be explained by the help of some of those Corpuscles that I have lately call'd more Simple and Radical; and such Explications being more simple and Mechanical, may be thought upon that score more fundamental and sa∣tisfactory.
CHAP. VIII.
I Know it may be objected in fa∣vour of the Chymists, that as their Hypostatical Principles, Salt, Sulphur and Mercury, are but three, so the Corpuscularian Principles are but very few; and the chief of them Bulk, Size, and Motion, are but three neither; so that it appears not why the Chymical Principles should be Page  39 more barren than the Mechanical. To which allegation I answer, that, be∣sides that these last nam'd Principles are more numerous, as taking in the Posture, Order, and Scituation, the Rest, and, above all, the almost infi∣nitely diversifiable Contextures of the small parts, and the thence re∣sulting structures of particular bodies, and fabrick of the world: Besides this, I say, each of the three Me∣chanical Principles, specified in the objection, though but one in name, is equivalent to many in effect; as Figure, for instance, comprehends not only Triangles, Squares, Rhom∣busses, Rhomboids, Trapezions, and a multitude of Polygons, whether ordinate or irregular; but, besides Cubes, Prismes, Cones, Spheres, Cy∣linders, Pyramids, and other Solids of known Denominations, a scarce numerable multitude of hooked, branched, Eel-like, screw-like, and other irregular bodies; whereof though these, and some others, have distinct appellations, yet the greatest Page  40 part are nameless; so that it need be no wonder, that I should make the Mechanical Principles so much more fertile, that is, applicable to the production and explication of a far greater number of Phaenomena, than the Chymical; which, whilest they are considered but as similar bodies, that are Ingredients of mixt and com∣pounded ones, are chiefly variable but by the greater or lesser quanti∣ty that is employed by Nature or Art to make up the mixt body. And Painters observe, that Black and White, though mixt in differing Pro∣portions, will still make but lighter and darker grays. And if it be said, that these Ingredients, by the Tex∣ture resulting from their mixtures, may acquire Qualities that neither of them had before; I shall answer, that, to alledge this, is in effect to confess, that they must take in the Mechanical Principles, (for to them belongs the Texture or Structure of bodies) to as∣sist the Chymical ones. And on this occasion, to borrow an illustration Page  41 from our unpublished Dialogue of the Requisites of a good Hypothesis, I shall add, that a Chymist that should pre∣tend, that because his three Principles are as many as those of the Corpus∣cularians, they are as sufficient as these to give an account of the Book of Nature, methinks, I say, he would do like a man that should pretend, that with four and twenty words he would make up a language as well as others can with the four and twenty Letters of the Alphabet, because he had as many words already formed, as they had of bare Letters; not con∣sidering that instead of the small number of variations that can be made of his words by Prepositions and Terminations, the Letters of the Alphabet being variously combined, placed and reiterated, can be easily made to compose not only his four and twenty words, with their variati∣ons, but as many others as a whole language contains.
Page  42
CHAP. IX.
NOtwithstanding all that I have been obliged to say to the Dis∣advantage of the Chymical Princi∣ples, in reference to the Explication of Qualities, I would not be thought to grant, that the Peripateticks have reason to triumph, as if their four Ele∣ments afforded a better Theory of Qualities. For, if I had, together with leisure enough to perform such a Task, any obligation to undertake it, I presume, it would not be difficult to shew, that the Aristotelian Doctrine about particular Qualities is liable to some of the same Objections with the Chymical, and to some others no less considerable; and that, to derive all the Phaenomena their Doctrine ought to solve from Substantial Forms and real Qualities Elementary, is to impose on us a Theory more barren and pre∣carious than that of the Spagy∣rists.
Page  43 That to derive the particular Qua∣lities of bodies from those Substantial Forms, whence the Schools would have them to flow, is but an insuffici∣ent and unfit way of accounting for them, may appear by this, that Substan∣tial Forms themselves are things, whose existence many Learned Phi∣losophers deny, whose Theory many of them think Incomprehensible, and the most Candid and Judicious of the Peripateticks themselves confess it to be very abstruse; so that from such doubtful and obscure Principles we can hardly expect clear Explications of the nature and Phaenomena of Qua∣lities; not to urge, that the Aristoteli∣an Definitions, both of Qualities in general, and of divers of the more fa∣miliar Qualities in particular, as Heat, Cold, Moisture, Diaphaneity, &c. are far enough from being clear and well framed, as we elsewhere have occasi∣on to shew.
Another thing, which makes the Scholastic Doctrine of Qualities un∣satisfactory, is, that it seldom so much Page  44 as attempts to teach the Manner how the Qualities themselves and their Effects or Operations are produced. Of this you may elsewhere find an Instance given in the Quality that is wont to be first in the list, viz that of Heat, which though it may intelligi∣bly and probably be explicated by the Corpuscular Hypothesis, yet in the Peripatetic account that is given of it, is both too questionable and too su∣perficial to give much Content to a Rational Inquirer. And indeed to say, that a Substantial Form (as that of the Fire) acts by a Quality (call'd Heat) whose Nature 'tis to produce such an effect (as to soften Wax or harden Clay) seems to be no other in sub∣stance, than to say, that it produces such an effect by some power it has to produce it. But what that power is, and how it operates, is that, which, though we most desire to know, we are left to seek. But to prosecute the Imperfections of the Peripatetick Hy∣pothesis, were to intrench upon ano∣ther discourse, where they are more Page  45 fully laid open. And therefore I shall now but lightly glance upon a couple of imperfections, that more particularly relate to the Doctrine of Qualities.
And first I do not think it a Con∣vincing Argument that is wont to be imployed by the Aristotelians for their Elements, as well as by the Chymists for their Principles, that, be∣cause this or that Quality, which they ascribe to an Element or a Principle, is found in this or that body, which they call mixt, therefore it must owe that Quality to the participation of that Principle or Element. For, the same Texture of parts or other mo∣dification of matter may produce the like Quality in the more simple and the more compounded body, and they may both separately derive it from the same Cause, and not one from the Participation of the other. So Water and Earth and Metals and Stones, &c. are heavy upon the ac∣count of the common Cause of Gra∣vity, and not because the rest partake Page  46 of the Earth; as may appear in Ele∣mentary water, which is as simple a body as it, and yet is heavy: So wa∣ter and oil, and exactly deflegm'd Spi∣rit of Wine, and Mercury, and also Metals and Glass of Antimony, and Minium or calcin'd Lead, whilest these three are in fusion are fluid, being made so by the variously determined motions of their minute parts and o∣ther Causes of Fluidity, and not by the participation of water, since the arid Calces of Lead and Antimony are not like to have retained in the fire so volatile a liquor as water, and since Fluidity is a Quality that Mer∣cury enjoys in a more durable man∣ner than Water it self: For that me∣talline liquor, as also Spirit of Wine well Rectified, will not be brought to freeze with the highest degree of Cold of our sharpest winters, though a far less degree of Cold would make water cease to be fluid and turn it into Ice.
To this I shall only add (in the se∣cond place,) that 'tis not unpleasant Page  47 to see, how arbitrarily the Peripate∣ticks derive the Qualities of bodies from their four Elements, as if, to give an instance in the lately named Qua∣lity, Liquidity, you shew them exact∣ly deflegmed Spirit of Wine, and ask them, whence it has its great Fluid∣ness, they will tell you from water, which yet is far less fluid than it, and this spirit of wine it self is much less so than the flame into which the spi∣rit of wine is easily resoluble. But if you ask, whence it becomes totally inflammable, they must tell you, from the fire; and yet the whole body, at least as far as sense can discover, is fluid, and the whole body becomes flame, (and then is most fluid of all;) so that fire and water as contrary as they make them, must both be by vast odds predominant in the same body. This spirit of wine also, being a li∣quor whose least parts that are sen∣sible are actually heavy, and compose a Liquor which is seven or eight hun∣dred times as heavy as Air of the same bulk, which yet experience Page  48 shews not to be devoid of weight, must be supposed to abound with Earthy particles, and yet this spiri∣tuous liquor may in a trice become Flame, which they would have to be the lightest body in the world.
But, to enlarge on this subject, would be to forget, that the design of this Tract engages me to deal not with the Peripatetic School, but the Spagyrical. To which I shall there∣fore return, and give you this ad∣vertisement about it, that what I have hitherto objected is meant a∣gainst the more common and receiv∣ed Doctrine about the Material Prin∣ciples of bodies reputed mixt, as 'tis wont by vulgar Chymists to be ap∣plied to the rendring an account of the Qualities of substances Corpo∣real; and therefore I pretend not, that the past objections should con∣clude against other Chymical Theo∣ries than that which I was concern∣ed to question. And if adept Philo∣sophers, (supposing there be such) or Page  49 any other more than ordinarily Intel∣ligent Spagyrists, shall propose any particular Hypotheses, differing from those that I have questioned, as their Doctrine and Reasons are not yet known to me; so I pretend not that the past Arguments should conclude against them, and am willing to think, that Persons advantaged with such peculiar opportunities to dive into the Mysteries of Nature, will be able to give us, if they shall please, a far better account of the Qualities of bodies than what is wont to be pro∣posed by the generality of Chy∣mists.
Thus, dear Pyrophilus, I have laid before you some of the chief Imper∣fections I have observed in the vul∣gar Chymists Doctrine of Qualities, and consequently I have given you some of the chief Reasons that hin∣der me from acquiescing in it. And as my objections are not taken from the Scholastical subtleties nor the doubtful speculations of the Peripa∣teticks or other Adversaries of the Page  50 Hermetick Philosophy, but from the nature of things and from Chymical experiments themselves; so I hope, if any of your Spagyrical friends have a minde to convince me, he will at∣tempt to doe it by the most proper way, which is, by actually giving us clear and particular explications, at least of the grand Phaenomena of Qua∣lities; which, if he shall do, he will find me very ready to acquiesce in a Truth that comes usher'd in, and endear'd by so acceptable and useful a thing, as a Philosophical Theory of Qualities.
FINIS.
Page  [unnumbered]
REFLECTIONS UPON THE Hypothesis OF ALCALI and ACIDUM. By the Honourable ROBERT BOYLE Esq; Fellow of the R. Society.
LONDON, Printed by E. Flesher, for R. Davis Bookseller in Oxford. 1675.
Page  [unnumbered]
THough the following Dis∣course was at first written by way of Appendix to the Trea∣tise of the Imperfection of the Chymical Doctrine of Qualities; yet the bulk of it, swelling be∣yond what was foreseen, made it seem expedient to publish it as a Tract by it self.
Page  3REFLECTIONS UPON THE Hypothesis OF Alcali and Acidum.
CHAP. I.
I Presume, it will not be difficult to discern, that much of what has been said about the Imperfection of the vulgar Chymical Doctrine con∣cerning Qualities, may with easie va∣riations be applied to some other Hy∣potheses that are of kin to that Do∣ctrine, and particularly to their Page  4 Theory, that would derive both the Qualities of Bodies and the rest of the Phaenomena of Nature from what they call Acidum and Alcali. For though these two differences may be met with in a great number and variety of bodies, and consequently the Consideratin of them may frequent∣ly enough be of good use, (especial∣ly to Spagyrists, and Physitians, when they are conversant about the secon∣dary and (if I may so call them) Chy∣mical Causes and Operations of di∣vers mixt bodies;) yet I confess I can∣not acquiesce in this Hypothesis of Al∣keli and Acidum, in the latitude, wherein I find it urged and applied by the Admirers of it, as if it could be usefully substituted in the place of Matter and Motion.
The Hypothesis, being in a sort sub∣ordinate to that of the tria prima, in ascribing to two contrary saline Prin∣ciples what vulgar Chymists do to their Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury; most of the objections we have made a∣gainst the vulgar Chymical Doctrine, Page  5 may, as I lately intimated, be applied, by a little variation, to this, and there∣fore I shall need but to touch upon the main things that keep me from ac∣quiescing in this Hypothesis.
CHAP. II.
AND first, it seems precarious to affirm, that in all bodies, or even in all the sensible parts of mixts, Acid and Alcalizate parts are found; there not having been, that I know, any Ex∣perimental Induction made of parti∣culars any thing near numerous enough to make out so great an asser∣tion, and in divers bodies, wherein Experience is vouch'd for the inex∣istence of these Principles, that Inex∣istence is indeed proved not by direct and clear experience, but upon a sup∣position, that such and such effects flow from the operations of the as∣sumed Principles.
Page  6 Some Spagyrists, when they see Aqua fortis dissolve Filings of Cop∣per, conclude from thence, that the Acid spirits of the Menstruum meet in the metal with an Alcali upon which they work; which is but an unsafe way of arguing, since good Spirit of Urin, which they take to be a volatile Alcali, and which will make a great Conflict with Aqua fortis, will, as I have elsewhere noted, dissolve filings of Copper both readily enough and more genuinly than the Acid liquor is wont to do. So when they see the Magistery of Pearl or Coral, made by dropping oil of Tartar into the solutions of those bodies made with spirit of Vinegar, they ascribe the Precipitation to the fixt Alcali of the Tartar, that mortifies the Acidity of the spirit of Vinegar; whereas the Precipitation would no less insue, if, instead of Alcalizat oil of Tartar, we imploy that highly acid liquor which they call Oleum Sulphuris per Cam∣panam.
Page  7 I think also it may be doubted, whether those, I reason with, are so certain as they suppose, that at least when they can manifestly discover an Acid, for instance, in a body, the operation of that body upon another, which they judge to abound with an Alcali, must be the effect of a Con∣flict between those two jarring Prin∣ciples, or, if I may so call them, Duel∣lists. For an Acid body may do ma∣ny things, not simply as an acid, but on the score of a Texture or modificati∣on, which endows it with other Qua∣lities as well as Acidity, whose being associated with those other Qualities in some cases may be but accidental to the effect to be produced; since by one or more of these other Qualities the body may act in cases, where Pre∣judice may make a Chymist consider nothing but Acidity. Thus when some Chymists see an acid Menstruum, as Aqua fortis, spirit of Salt, oil of Vi∣triol, &c. dissolve Iron, they present∣ly ascribe the effect to an Acidity of the liquors, whereas well dephlegmed Page  8 Urinous Spirits, which they hold to have a great Antipathy to Acids, will, as I have tried in some of them, readi∣ly enough dissolve crude Iron even in the Cold. And on the other side, Mercury will not work on the filings of Iron, though this be so open a metal that even weak liquors will do it; and yet if one should urge, that Quicksilver readily dissolves Gold in Amalgamation, he may expect to be told, according to their Doctrine, that Mercury has in it an occult acid, by which it performs the solution; whereas it seems much more proba∣ble, that Mercury has Corpuscles of such a shape and size as fit them to in∣sinuate themselves into the Commen∣surate Pores they meet with in Gold, but make them unfit to enter readily the Pores of Iron, to which Nature has not made them congruous; as on the other side the saline Corpuscles of Aqua fortis will easily find admission into the Pores of Iron, but not into those of Gold, to which they do not correspond as they do to the others. Page  9 And when a knife, whose blade is touched with a Load-stone, cuts bread and takes up filings of Iron, it does neither of them upon the score of Alcali and Acidum, but the one up∣on the visible shape and the stiffness of the blade, and the other upon the latent Contrivance or change of Tex∣ture produced by the operation of the Load-stone in the particles that compose the Steel.
This may perhaps be farther illu∣strated by adding, that when blew Vitriol, being beaten and finely sear∣ced, makes a white pouder, that whiteness is a quality which the pou∣der has not as being of a Vitriolate Nature. For Rock-Crystal or Venice-glass being finely beaten will have the same operation on the Eye, but it proceeds from the transparen∣cy of the body and the minuteness, multitude and confus'd scituation of the Corpuscles that make up the Pouder. And therefore, if other bo∣dies be brought by Comminution in∣to parts endow'd with such Mechani∣cal Page  10 affections, as we have named; these aggregates will act upon the or∣gans of Sight as white bodies.
CHAP. III.
AND this leads me to another Exception against the Hypothe∣sis of the Duellists, which is, that the Framers of it seem arbitrarily to have assigned Provinces or Offices to each of their two Principles, as the Chy∣mists do to each of their tria prima, and the Peripateticks to each of their Four Elements. For 'tis not enough to Say, that an Acid, for instance, as such, performs these things, and an Alkali so many others, that they di∣vide the Operations and Phaenomena of nature, or at least (as some, more cautious, are content to say) of mixt bodies between them; since Asserti∣ons of such great moment ought not to be advanc'd or received without Page  11 sufficient Proof. And perhaps the very distribution of Salts into Acids and Alcalies hath somewhat of arbi∣trary in it, since others may, without assuming much more, take the free∣dom to distribute them otherwise, there being not only several things wherein Acids and Alcalies agree, but also several things wherein Salts of the same denomination widely differ. As, for Instance, some Alkalies, accord∣ing to those I reason with, are, like salt of Tartar, fixt, and will endure the violence of the fire; others, like salt of Urin or Harts-horn, are exceed∣ingly fugitive, and will be driven up with a scarce sensible degree of Heat; some, as salt of Tartar, will precipitate the solution of Sublimate into an Orange-tawny; others, as spirit of Blood and Harts-horn, precipitate such a solution into a milky substance. Oil of Tartar will very slowly ope∣rate upon filings of Copper, which Spirit of Urin and Harts-horn will readily dissolve in the Fire.
Page  10〈1 page duplicate〉Page  11〈1 page duplicate〉
Page  12 And among Acids themselves the difference is no less if not much greater. Some of them will dissolve bodies that others will not, as Aqua fortis will dissolve Silver and Mercu∣ry, but leave Gold untouched; or as Aqua Regis, though made without Sal Armoniac that dissolves Gold readily, will dissolve Mercury but scurvily, and Silver not at all. And this may happen, when the Menstruum that will not dissolve the body is reputed much stronger than that which does; as dephlegm'd spirit of Vinegar will dissolve Lead, reduc'd to minute parts in the cold; which is an effect that Chymists are not wont to expect from Spirit of Salt. Nay, which is more, one Acid will precipitate what another has dissolved, and contrarily; as spirit of Salt will precipitate Silver out of spirit of Nitre. And I found oil of Vitriol to precipitate bodies of divers kinds, Minerals and others, out of some acid Menstruums, particularly spirit of Vinegar.
Page  13 To this might be added the Pro∣perties, peculiar to some particular Acids, as that Spirit of Nitre or Aqua fortis will dissolve Camphire into an Oil, and coagulate common oil into a consistent and brittle substance like Tallow; and, though it will both corrode Silver, Copper, Lead, and Mercury, and keep them dissolved, it will quickly let fall almost the whole body of Tin, very soon after it has corroded as much as it can of it. By all which, and some other like Instan∣ces, I am induc'd to question, whether the Acidum and Alkali, we are speak∣ing of, have the simplicity that Philo∣sophy requires in Principles; and shall be kept from wondering, if others shall think it as free for them to constitute other Principles, as 'tis for the Learned men I reason with, to pitch upon Acidum and Alkali.
And some perhaps will be bold to say, that, since the former of those Principles comprehend such a number of bodies, that are, many of them, very differing, and some of them directly Page  14 contrary in their operations, it seems a slight and not Philosophical Ac∣count of their Nature, to define an Acid by its Hostility to an Alcali, which (they will say) is almost as if one should define a Man by saying, that he is an Animal that is at enmity with the Serpent; or a Lyon, that he is a fourfooted beast that flies from a Crowing Cock.
CHAP. IV.
BUT although one of the chiefest Conditions that Philosophers may justly require in Principles, is, that, being to explain other things, they should be very clear themselves; yet I do not much wonder, that the Definitions given us of Acidum and Alcali should be but unaccurate and superficial, since I find not, that they have themselves any clear and deter∣minate Notion or sure marks, where∣by to know them distinctly, without Page  15 which Chymists will scarce be able to form clear and setled Notions of them. For to infer, as is usual, that, because a body dissolves another, which is dissoluble by this or that known acid, the Solvent must also be acid; or to conclude, that, if a body precipitates a dissolved metal out of a confessedly acid Menstruum, the Precipitant must be an Alcali, to argue thus, I say, 'tis unsecure; since, not to repeat what I said lately of Copper, I found, that filings of Spelter will be dissolved as well by some Alcalies, (as spirit of Sal Armoniac) as by Acids. And bodies may be precipitated out of acid Menstruums, both by other Acids, and by liquors, where there appears not the least Alcali: As I have found, that a solution of Tin∣glass, made in Aqua fortis, would be precipitated both by Spirit of Salt and by common or rain water. And as for the other grand way that Chy∣mists employ, to distinguish Acids and Alcalies, namely by the Heat, Commo∣tion, and bubbles that are excited, Page  16 upon their being put together, that may be no such certain sign as they presume, they having indeed a depen∣dance upon particular Contextures and other Mechanical affections, that Chymists are not wont to take any notice of. For almost any thing that is fitted variously and vehemently to agitate the minute parts of a body, will produce Heat in it; and so, though water be neither an Acid nor an Alcalizate liquor, yet it would quickly grow very hot, not only with the highly acid Oil of Vitriol, but (as I have more than once pur∣posely tried and found) with the fie∣ry Alcalizat Salt of Tartar. And 'tis to be noted, that neither in the one nor the other of these Incalescent mixtures, there is produced any such visible or audible conflict, as, accord∣ing to the Doctrine of the Chymists I reason with, one would expect. And as for the production of bubbles, especially if accompanied with a hissing noise, neither is that such a certain sign as Chymists imagine: For Page  17 the production of bubbles is not a necessary effect or concomitant of Heat excited by Conflicts, but de∣pends very much upon the peculiar Disposition of Bodies put together to extricate, produce, or intercept par∣ticles of Air, (or Steams, for the time equivalent to them;) and therefore as Oil of Vitriol, mixt in a due proporti∣on with fair water, may be brought to make the water too hot to be held in ones hand, without exciting bubbles; so I have found by trials purposely made, that Alcalizat Spirit of Urine drawn from some kinds of Quick-lime, being mixt with Oil of Vitriol moderately strong, would produce an intense Heat, whilest it produced ei∣ther no manifest bubbles at all, or scarce any, though the Urinous Spi∣rit was strong, and in other Trials operated like an Alcali; and although also with Spirit of Urin, made per se the common way, the oil of Vitriol will produce a great hissing and a multitude of conspicuous bubbles. Page  18 On the other side I have sometimes, though not so constantly, found, that some Acid Spirits, especially that of Verdigrease made per se, would, when poured upon Salt of Tartar, make a Conflict with it, and produce a copi∣ous froth, though we observed it not to be accompanied with any manifest Heat. And I elsewhere mention two bodies, upon whose putting together numerous bubbles would, for a long time, and not without noise, be gene∣rated, and succeed one another, though I could perceive no Heat at all to accompany this Tumult.
As for the Tast, which by many is made a great Touchstone, whereby to know Acids and Alcalies, I consider that there is a multitude of mixt bo∣dies, wherein we can so little discern by the Tast, which of the Principles is Predominant, that this Sense would not oblige one to suspect, much less to conclude, there were one grain of ei∣ther of them to be found there; such bodies are Diamonds and Rubies, and Page  19 most Gems, besides many ignobler Stones, and Gold and Silver and Mer∣cury, and I know not how many other bodies. On the other side, there are bodies that abound with Acid or Al∣calizat Salts, which either have no Tast, or a quite differing one from that of the Chymical Principle. As though Venice-glass be in great part composed of a fixt Alcali; yet to the Tongue it is insipid, and Crystalls of Lune and of Lead made with Aqua fortis, and containing great store of the Acid particles of the Menstruum, have nothing of Acidity in the mouth, the latter having a saccharine sweet∣ness, and the former an extream bit∣terness. And even in Vegetable sub∣stances that have a manifest Tast, 'tis not so easie to know by that, whether it be the Acid or the Alcalizat Prin∣ciple that is predominant in them; as in the Essential oils of Spices and o∣ther Vegetables. And in the gross Empereumatical Oils of Woods, and even in high Rectified Spirit of Wine, Page  20 which therefore some will have to be an Alcalizat liquor, and others list it among Acids, though I did not find it neither to be destroyed or much al∣tered by being put upon Coral or salt of Tartar, as would happen to an acid Menstruum, nor yet by being digested with and distilled from sea Salt, as might be probably expected from an Alcalizat one: Aand among those very bodies which their Tasts perswade Chymists to reckon amongst Acids, one may (according to what I formerly noted) observe so great a difference and variety of relishes, that, perhaps without being too severe, I may say, that if I were to allow Acids to be One Principle, it should be only in some such Metaphysical sense, as that wherein Air is said to be One Body, though it consist of the associated ef∣fluviums of a multitude of Corpuscles of very differing Natures, that agree in very little save in their being mi∣nute enough to concur to the Com∣position of a fluid aggregate, consist∣ing Page  21 of flying parts. But having dwelt longer than I intended on One Obje∣ction, 'tis time that I proceed to those that remain.
CHAP. V.
ANother particular, I am unsatis∣fied with in the Hypothesis of Alcali and Acidum, is, that 'tis in divers cases either needless or useless to ex∣plain the Phaenomena of Qualities, there being several of these produ∣ced, destroyed, or altered, where there does not appear any accession, recess, or change of either of those two Principles; as when fluid water by hard beating is turn'd into consistent froth, and when transparent red Co∣ral is, barely by being beaten and sifted finely, changed into a white and opacous powder; and as when a very flexible piece of fine silver being hammer'd is brought to have a brisk spring, and after a while will, instead Page  22 of continuing malleable, crack or cleave under the hammer; and as when (to dispatch and omit other in∣stances) a sufficiently thin leaf of Gold, held between the Light and the Eye, appears green.
Another thing (of kin to the for∣mer,) that I like not in the Doctrine of Acidum and Alcali, is, that though the Patrons of it, whilest they would seem to constitute but two Principles, are fain (as I lately intimated) to make I know not how many differing sorts of Acids, besides some variety of Alca∣lies; yet their Principles are too few and narrow to afford any satisfactory explication of the Phaenomena. For I fear, 'twill be very difficult for them to give a Rational Account of Gravi∣ty, Springiness, Light, and Emphatical Colours, Sounds, and some other Qualities that are wont to be called manifest; and much more of several that are confest to be occult, as Ele∣ctricity, and Magnetism; in which last I see not, how the affirming that Page  23 there is in the Magnet an Acid and an Alcali, and that these two are of contrary Natures, will help to explain, how a Load-stone does, as they speak, attract the same end of a poised needle with one of its Poles, which 'twill drive away with the other, and determine that needle when freely placed, to point North and South, and enable it to communicate by its bare touch the same Properties, and abun∣dance of other strange ones, to ano∣ther piece of Steel. But I forbear to alledge particular Examples refer∣rable to the several Qualities above∣mentioned, whether manifest or hid∣den, because that in great part is al∣ready done in our Notes about parti∣cular Qualities, in which 'twill appear how little able the employing of Al∣cali and Acidum will be to afford us an account of many things. And though I enlarge not here on this objecti∣on, yet I take it to be of that impor∣tance, that, though there were no o∣ther, this were enough to shew that Page  24 the Hypothesis that is liable to it, is Insufficient for the explication of Qualities; and therefore 'twill not I presume be thought strange that I add, that, as for those that would ex∣tend this narrow Chymical Doctrine to the whole object of Natural Philo∣sophy, they must do more than I ex∣pect they will be able before they can make me their Proselyte, there being a multitude of Phaenomena in nature (divers whereof I elsewhere take no∣tice of in reference to the Chymists Philosophy) in which what Acidum and Alcali have to do, I confess I do not understand.
Page  25
CHAP. VI.
THE last thing (which comprizes several others) that seems to me a defect in the Doctrine of Alcali and Acidum, is, that divers if not most of those very things that are preten∣ded to be explicated by them, are not satisfactorily explicated, some things being taken into the explications that are either not fundamental enough or not clearly intelligible, or are charge∣able with both those Imperfecti∣ons.
And first I am dissatisfied with the very fundamental Notion of this Doctrine, namely a supposed Hostili∣ty between the tribe of Acids and that of Alkalies, accompanied, if you will have it so, with a friendship or sympathy with bodies belonging to the same tribe or Family. For I look upon Amity and Enmity as Affecti∣ons of Intelligent Beings, and I have Page  26 not yet found it explained by any, how those Appetites can be placed in Bodies Inanimate and devoid of knowledge, or of so much as Sense. And I elsewhere endeavour to shew, that what is called Sympathy and Antipathy between such bodies does in great part depend upon the actings of our own Intellect, which, supposing in every body an innate appetite to preserve it self both in a defensive and an offensive way, inclines us to con∣clude, that that body, which, though designlesly destroys or impairs the state or texture of another body, has an Enmity to it, though perhaps a slight Mechanical change may make bodys, that seem extreamly hostile, seem to agree very well and co∣operate to the production of the same effects. As if the acid spirit of Salt and the volatile Alkali (as they will have it) that is commonly called Spirit of Urine be put together, they will, after a short though fierce con∣flict, upon a new contexture unite to∣gether Page  27 into a Salt, little, if at all, differ∣ing from Sal Armoniac, in which the two reconciled Principles will amica∣bly join in cooling of water, dissolv∣ing some metalline bodys, and produ∣cing divers other effects. And so, if upon a strong solution of Salt of Pot∣ashes or of Salt of Tartar, good Spirit of Nitre be dropt in a due propor∣tion, after the Heat and Tumult and Ebullition are over, the Acid and the Alkalizat Salts will convene into such a Concretion as Salt-peter, which is taken to be a natural body, either ho∣mogeneous, or at least consisting of parts that agree very friendly toge∣ther, and conspire to constitute the particular kind of Salt that Chymists call Nitre.
But the Sympathy and Antipa∣thy that is said to be betwixt Inani∣mate bodys, I elsewhere more parti∣cularly consider, and therefore I shall now add in the second place, That the Explications made of Phaenomena according to the Doctrine of AlcaliPage  28 and Acidum do not, in my apprehensi∣on, perform what may be justly ex∣pected from Philosophical Explicati∣ons. 'Tis said indeed, that the Acidum working on the Alcali, or this upon that, produces the effect proposed; but that is only to tell us, what is the Agent that operates, and not the Man∣ner of the operation, or the means and process whereby it produces the effect proposed, and 'tis this modus that Inquisitive Naturalists chiefly desire to learn. And if it be said, that it is by the mutual hostility of the Principles that the effect is produced, it may be answered, that besides, that that hostility it self is not, as we have just now observed, a thing clear, if so much as Intelligible; this is so gene∣ral and indeterminate a way of expli∣cating things, as can afford little or no satisfaction to a searching and cauti∣ous Naturalist, that considers how ve∣ry numerous and very various the Phaenomena of Qualities are.
Page  29
CHAP. VII.
TO clear up and to countenance what I have been now saying, I shall only take notice of some few obvious Phaenomena of one of the most familiar Operations wherein Acidum and Alcali are supposed to be the grand Agents. 'Tis known to the very Boys of Chymists, that Aqua Regis will dissolve Gold, Cop∣per, and Mercury, and that with these metals, especially with the second, it will produce an intense degree of heat. If now the Cause of this Heat be demanded, it may be ex∣pected, that the Patrons of the Du∣ellists will answer, that 'tis from the action of the Acid salts of the Men∣struum upon the Alcali they meet with in the Metalls. But not to mention how many things are here presumed, not proved; nor that I know some Acid Menstruums, and Page  30 some much more evidently Alcali∣zate Bodys than these Metals are, which yet do not upon their mix∣tures produce any sensible heat; not, I say, to mention these, it is easie to discern, that this answer names in∣deed two supposed efficients of Heat, but does not explicate or declare how these Agents produce that Qua∣lity, which depends upon a certain vehement and various agitation of the singly insensible parts of Bodys, whether the Duellists, or any other, though very differing, Causes put them into a motion so modified. And therefore Gold and Copper by bare Concussion may be brought to an intense degree of heat without the accession of any acid parts to work upon them. But then fur∣ther, when we are told, that Aqua Regis by its Acidity working on the Metalline Alcali makes a dissolution of the Metal; I am told indeed what they think to be the Agent in this change, but not at all satisfied Page  31 how this Agent effects it; for, Cop∣per being a very hard metal, and Gold generally esteemed by Chy∣mists the closest and compactest Bo∣dy in nature, I would gladly know, by what power and way such weak and probably either brittle or flex∣ible bodys as acid Salts, are enabled with that force to disjoin such so∣lid and closely coherent Corpuscles as make up the visible masses of Copper and Gold, nay, and scat∣ter them with that violence as per∣haps to toss up multitudes of them into the air. And since in the disso∣lution of these Metals there is ano∣ther Phaenomenon to be accounted for, as well as the forcing of the parts asunder, namely the sustenta∣tion of the Metal in the Menstruum, the Chymists would have much in∣formed me, if they had well ex∣plained, how their Acidum and Al∣cali is able to sustain and give flui∣dity to the Corpuscles of the dissolv∣ed Metal, which though it be but Page  32 Copper, is nine times as heavy as a bulk of water equal to it, and if it be Gold, is nineteen times heavier than the Liquor that must keep it from sinking; and at least divers times heavier in specie than the Salts, that are mingled with the aqueous parts, can make the Menstruum com∣posed of them both. Whereas Trial has assured me, that, if a piece of Wax or any other such matter be made by less than the hundredth part heavier than an equal bulk of Water, it will, when thoroughly immersed, fall to the bottom and rest there. I might also ask a further Question about these Dissolutions, as why, whereas Aqua Regis dissolves Mercury without being much chan∣ged in colour by it, Gold retains its own Citrinity or yellowness in the solvent, and the solution of Copper is of a colour, which being greenish∣blew is quite differing from that of the metal that affords it, as well as from that of the solvent? And I Page  33 might recruit these with other Que∣ries not impertinent, but that these may suffice (for a sample) on this Occasion, and allow me to con∣clude this Chapter, by represent∣ing One thing which I would glad∣ly recommend and inculcate to you, namely, that Those Hypotheses do not a little hinder the progress of Humane knowledge that introduce Morals and Politicks into the Ex∣plications of Corporeal Nature, where all things are indeed trans∣acted according to Laws Mechani∣cal.
Page  34
CHAP. VIII.
I Might easily have been more co∣pious in the Instances annext to the foregoing Animadversions, but that, being desirous to be short as well as clear, I purposely declined to make use of divers others, that seemed proper to be employed, and indeed might safely enough have been so, because those I have men∣tioned, and especially those, (which make a great part of them) that are Mechanical, are not liable to the same exceptions, that I foresaw might be made to elude the force of the Examples I passed by. And though I think I could very well make those foreseen Objections ap∣pear groundless or unsatisfactory; yet that could scarce be done with∣out engaging in Controversies that would prove more tedious than I judged them necessary.
Page  35 And yet, although what I have said in this Excursion be but a part of what I could say, I would not be thought to have forgot what I intimated at the beginning of it. For though the Reasons I alledged keep me from acquiescing in the Doctrine of Alcali and Acidum, as 'tis proposed under the notion of a Philosophical Hypothesis, such as the Cartesian or Epicurean, which are each of them alledged by their em∣bracers to be Mechanical, and of a very Catholick extent; yet I de∣ny not, that the Consideration of the Duellists (or the two jarring Principles of Alcali and Acidum) may be of good use to Spagyrists and Physitians, as I elsewhere fur∣ther declare. Nor do I pretend by the past discourse that questions one Doctrine of the Chymists, to beget a general contempt of their Noti∣ons, and much less of their Experi∣ments. For the operations of Chy∣mistry may be misapplied by the er∣roneous Page  36 Reasonings of the Artists without ceasing to be themselves things of great use, as being appli∣cable as well to the Discovery or Confirmation of solid Theories, as the production of new Phaenomena, and beneficial effects. And though I think, that many Notions of Para∣celsus and Helmont and some other Eminent Spagyrists are unsolid, and not worthy the veneration that their Admirers cherish for them; yet di∣vers of the Experiments, which ei∣ther are alledged to favour these notions, or on other accounts are to be met with among the followers of these men, deserve the curiosity if not the esteem of the Industrious In∣quirers into Natures Mysteries. And looking upon Chymistry in gross as a Discipline subordinate to Physiques, even Mechanical Philo∣sophers may justly, in my opinion, think favourably of it, since, what∣ever Imperfections, or, if they please, Extravagancies there may be in Page  37 the Principles and Explications of Paracelsus or other Leading Artists, these faults of the Theorical part may be sufficiently compensated by the Utilities that may be deri∣ved from the Practical part. And this I am the rather induced to say, because the Experiments, that Chymistry furnishes, may much assist a Naturalist to rectifie the Erroneous Theories that often∣times accompany Them, and even those (Mistakes) that are endeavour'd to be evinced by them.
And (to conclude) Chymistry seems to deal with men in refe∣rence to Notions, as it does in re∣ference to Metals, assisting wary men to detect the Errors, unto which it may have misled the un∣wary: For the same Art that has taught some to impose on o∣thers, (and perhaps themselves first) by blanching Copper, imitating Gold, &c. does also supply Say-masters Page  38 and Refiners, with the Means, by the Cupel, Cements, Aqua fortis, &c. to examine, whether Coins be true or false, and discover Adulte∣rate Gold and Silver to be Counter∣feit.
FINIS.
Page  [unnumbered]Page  [unnumbered]Page  [unnumbered]
EXPERIMENTS, AND NOTES, About The Mechanical Origine AND PRODUCTION OF VOLATILITY. By the Honourable ROBERT BOYLE Esq; Fellow of the R. Society.
LONDON, Printed by E. Flesher, for R. Davis Bookseller in Oxford. 1675.
Page  [unnumbered]Page  1
ADVERTISEMENTS About the EXPERIMENTS AND NOTES Relating to CHYMICAL Qualities.
WHen, after I had gone through the common Operations of Chymistry, I began to make some serious Reflections on them, I thought 'twas pity, that Instruments that might prove so serviceable to the advancement of Natural Philo∣sophy, should not be more studiously and skilfully made use of to so good Page  2 a purpose. I saw indeed, that divers of the Chymists had by a diligent and laudable employment of their pains and industry, obtain'd divers Productions, and lighted on several Phaenomena considerable in their kind, and indeed more numerous, than, the narrowness and sterility of their Principles consider'd, could well be expected. But I observed too, that the generality of those that busie themselves about Chymical O∣perations; some because they pra∣ctise Physick; and others because they either much wanted, or gree∣dily coveted money, aimed in their Trials but at the Preparation of good Medicines for the humane bo∣dy, or to discover the ways of cu∣ring the Diseases or Imperfections of Metals, without referring their Tri∣als to the advancement of Natural Philosophy in general; of which most of the Alchymists seem to have been so incurious, that not onely they did not institute Experiments Page  3 for that purpose, but overlookt and despis'd those undesign'd ones that occurr'd to them whilst they were prosecuting a preparation of a Me∣dicine, or a Transmutation of Me∣tals. The sense I had of this too ge∣neral omission of the Chymists, tem∣pted me sometimes to try, whether I could do any thing towards the re∣pairing of it by handling Chymistry, not as a Physician, or an Alchymist, but as a meer Naturalist, and so by applying Chymical Operations to Philosophical purposes. And in pursuance of these thoughts, I re∣member I drew up a Scheme of what I ventur'd to call a Chymia Philoso∣phica, not out of any affectation of a splendid Title, but to intimate, that the Chymical Operations, there treated of, were not directed to the usual scopes of Physicians, or Trans∣muters of Metals, but partly to il∣lustrate or confirm some Philosophi∣cal Theories by such Operations; and partly to explicate those Opera∣tions Page  4 by the help of such Theo∣ries.
But before I had made any great progress in the pursuit of this de∣sign, the fatal Pestilence that raged in London, and in many other parts of England, in the years 1664 and 65, obliging me among the rest to make several removes; which put me upon taking new measures, and engaging me in other employments of my time, made me so long neglect the Papers I had drawn up, that at last I knew not where to finde them, (though I hope they are not yet mislaid beyond recovery,) which I was the less troubled at, because the great difficulties, to be met with in such an undertaking, did not a little discourage me, such a Task requi∣ring as well as deserving a Person better furnished, than I had reason to think my self, with Abilities, Lei∣sure, Chymical Experiments, and Conveniences, to try as many more as should appear needful. But yet Page  5 to break the Ice for any that may hereafter think fit to set upon such a Work, or to shorten my own La∣bour, if I should see cause to resume it my self, I was content to throw in among my Notes about other Parti∣cular Qualities, some Experiments and Observations about some of those, that I have elsewhere call'd Chymical Qualities, because 'tis chies∣ly by the Operations of Chymists, that men have been induced to take special notice of them. Of these Notes I have assigned to some Qua∣lities more, and to some fewer, as either the nature or importance of the Subject seemed to require, or my Leisure and other Circumstan∣ces would permit. And though I have not here handled the Subjects they belonged to, as if I intended such a Chymia Philosophica as I late∣ly mentioned, because my design did not make it necessary, but did perhaps make it impertinent for me to do so, yet in some of the larger Page  6 Notes about Volatility and Fixtness, and especially about Precipitation, I have given some little Specimens of the Theorical part of a Philosophi∣cal Account of those Qualities or Operations, that I hope will not be wholly useless. I know, it may be objected, that I should have employ∣ed for Instances some more consider∣able Experiments, if not Arcana; but though possibly I am not alto∣gether unfurnished with such, yet aiming rather to promote Philoso∣phy, than appear a Possessor of ela∣borate Processes, I declined several Experiments that required either more skill, or more time, or more expence than could be well expect∣ed from most Readers, and chose rather to employ such Experiments as may be more easily or cheaply tried, and, which is mainly to be consider'd, being more simple, are more clearly intelligible, and more fit to have Notions and Theories built upon them; especially considering, Page  7 that the Doctrine of Qualities being it self conversant about some of the Rudimental parts, if I may so call them, of Natural Philosophy, it seemed unfit to employ intricate Ex∣periments, and whose Causes were liable to many disputes, to settle a Theory of them. In short, my de∣sign being to hold a Taper not so much to Chymists as to the Natu∣ralists, 'twas fit I should be less soli∣citous to gratifie the former than to inform the later.
FINIS.
Page  [unnumbered]Page  3
EXPERIMENTS, AND NOTES, About The Mechanical Origine AND PRODUCTION OF VOLATILITY.
CHAP. I.
AS far as I have yet observed, the Qualifications or Attributes, on whose account a portion of matter is found to be Volatile, are chiefly four; whereof the three for∣mer most regard the single Corpuscles Page  4 as such; and the last, the manner of their Union in the aggregate or bo∣dy they make up.
But before I enter upon particu∣lars, give me leave to advertise you here once for all, That in the follow∣ing Notes about Volatility and Fixt∣ness, when I speak of the Corpuscles or minute parts of a body, I doe not mean strictly either the Elementary parts, such as Earth and Water, or the Hypostatical Principles, such as Salt, Sulphur, or Mercury; for these things come not here into considera∣tion: But onely such Corpuscles, whether of a simple, compounded or decompounded Nature, as have the particles they consist of so firmly uni∣ted, that they will not be totally dis∣joyned or dissipated by that degree of Fire or Heat, wherein the matter is said to be volatile or to be fixt. But these combined particles will in their aggregate either ascend, or con∣tinue unraised per modum Ʋnius (as they speak) or as one intire Corpu∣scle. As in a Corpuscle of Sal Armo∣niac, Page  5 whether it be a natural or fac∣titious thing, or whether it be per∣fectly similar, or compounded of dif∣fering parts, I look upon the intire Corpuscle as a volatile portion of matter; and so I doe on a Corpuscle of Sulphur, though experience shews when 'tis kindled, that it has great store of acid Salt in it, but which is not extricated by bare sublimation: And so Colcothar of Vitriol falls un∣der our consideration as a fixt body, without inquiring what cupreous or other mineral and not totally fixt parts may be united with the Earthly ones; since the fires, we expose it to, do not separate them.
And this being premised in the ge∣neral, I now proceed to some parti∣culars. And first to make a volatile body, the parts should be very small. For, caeteris paribus, those that are so, are more easily put into motion by the action of the fire and other A∣gents, and consequently more apt to be elevated, when, by the determi∣nation of the movent, the situation Page  6 of the neighbouring bodies, or other Mechanical Circumstances, the agi∣tated Corpuscles can continue their motion with less resistance upwards than any other way, (as either down∣wards or horizontally.) And if, as 'tis highly probable, that which in light bodies, or at least in most of them, is wont to pass for positive Le∣vity, be but a less degree of gravity than that of those contiguous bodies that raise them; it will happen, that in very many cases, (for I say not in all) the great proportion of the sur∣face of a Corpuscle to its bulk, (which is usually greater in the lesser parti∣cles) by making it more apt to be wrought on, either by the air agita∣ted by the fire, or by the effluvia of kindled fuell, or by the impulse of the shaken Corpuscles of the body it self, will much facilitate the elevati∣on of such a minute particle, by ex∣posing a greater portion of it to the action of the agent, as it will often∣times also facilitate the renewed su∣stentation of such a small body in the Page  7 air, which resists more the descent of particles whose surfaces are large, than of others of the same gravity and bulk: As a leaf of paper display∣ed will much longer hover in the Air, than if it were reduced into a ball or pellet. That this minuteness of particles may dispose them to be carried upwards, by the impulse of other bodies and that of the agitated Air, is very obvious to be observed: As we see, that Horses in a high-way, though they be not able with the strokes of their feet to make stones, or gravel, or clods of Earth fly up, yet they will easily raise clouds of dust oftentimes mingled with the smaller grains of sand. And where Timber is sawing, the same wind that will not in the least move the beams, and scarce at all move the chips, will easily carry up the Saw-dust into the Air. And we see in our Chimneys, that the smoak readily ascends, whilst even small clods of soot, which is but an aggregate of the particles of smoak, fall headlong down.
Page  8
CHAP. II.
THE next qualification requisite in the corpuscles of Volatile bodies is, that they be not too solid or heavy. For if they be so, though their bulk be very small, yet, unless other Circumstances do much com∣pensate their weight, 'twill be very difficult to elevate them, because of the great disproportion of their spe∣cific gravity to that of the Air, (which contributes to sustain and e∣ven raise many sorts of volatile parts) and to the strength of the igneous effluvia or other agents that would carry them up. Thus we see, that filings of Lead or Iron, and even Minium (which is the calx of Lead) though the grains they consist of be very small, will not easily be blown up like common dust, or meal, or o∣ther powders made of less ponderous materials.
A third Qualification to be desired in the corpuscles that should make Page  9 up a Volatile body is, that they be conveniently shaped for motion. For if they be of branched, hook'd, or other very irregular or inconvenient figures, they will be apt to be stopt and detained by other bodies, or en∣tangled among themselves, and con∣sequently very difficult to be carried upwards, in regard that, whilst they are thus fastened either to one ano∣ther, or to any stable body, each single Corpuscle is not onely to be considered, as having its own pecu∣liar bulk, since its cohesion with the other corpuscle or body that detains it, makes them fit to be look'd upon per modum Ʋnius; that degree of heat they are exposed to being pre∣sumed uncapable of disjoyning them. And this may be one Reason, why Water, though it be specifically hea∣vier than Oil, yet is much more easily brought to exhale in the form of va∣pours than is Oil, whose corpuscles by the lasting stains they leave on cloath, wood, wool, &c. (which wa∣ter will but transiently moisten, not Page  10 stain) seems to be of very intangling figures.
The fourth and last qualification requisite in a Volatile body is, that the parts do loosely adhere, or at least be united in such a manner, as does not much indispose them to be separated by the fire in the form of fumes or vapours.
For he that considers the matter, will easily grant, that, if the contex∣ture of the corpuscles, whereof a bo∣dy consists, be intricate, or their co∣hesion strong, their mutual implica∣tion, or their adherence to each o∣ther, will make one part hinder ano∣ther from flying separately away, and their conjunction will make them too heavy or unweildy to be elevated to∣gether, as intire though compounded parts. Thus we see, that in Spring, or the beginning of Summer, a wind, though not faint, is unable to carry off the lightest leaves of trees, be∣cause they stick fast to the bows and twigs on which they grow, but in Autumn, when that adhesion ceases, Page  11 and the leaves sit but loosely on, a wind no stronger than that they re∣sisted before, will with ease blow them off, and perhaps carry them up a good way into the Air. But here note, that it was not without some cause, that I added above, that in a fluid body, the parts should at least be united in such a manner, as does not much indispose them to be sepa∣rated. For 'tis not impossible, that the parts of a body may, by the fi∣gures and smoothness of the surfaces, be sufficiently apt to be put into mo∣tion, and yet be indisposed to admit such a motion as would totally sepa∣rate them and make them fly up into the Air. As, if you take two pieces of very flat and well-polished marble or glass, and lay them one upon the other, you easily make them slide a∣long each others surfaces, but not easily pull up one of them, whilest the other continues its station. And when Glass is in the state of fusion, the parts of it will easily slide along each other, (as is usual in those of o∣ther Page  12 fluids) and consequently change places, and yet the continuity of the whole is not intirely broken, but every corpuscle does somewhere touch some other corpuscle, and thereby maintain the cohesion that indisposes it for that intire separation accompanied with a motion upwards that we call avolation. And so, when Salt-peter alone, is in a Cruci∣ble exposed to the fire, though a ve∣ry moderate degree of it will suffice to bring the Salt to a state of fusion, and consequently to put the corpu∣scles that compose it into a restless motion; yet a greater degree of heat, than is necessary to melt it, will not extricate so much as the Spirits, and make them fly away.
CHAP. III.
THE foregoing Doctrine of the Volatility of bodies may be as well illustrated as applied, if we proceed to deduce from it the gene∣rall Page  13 ways of Volatilization of bodies, or of introducing volatility into an assigned portion of matter. For these wayes seem not inconveniently reducible to five, which I shall seve∣rally mention, though Nature and Art do usually imploy two or more of them in conjunction. For which Reason I would not, when I speak of one of these wayes, be understood as if, excluding the rest, I meant that no other concurred with it.
The first of the five ways or means of Volatilizing a body is, to reduce it into minute parts, and, caeteris paribus, the more minute they are the bet∣ter.
That the bringing a body into ve∣ry minute parts may much conduce to the volatilizing of it, may be ga∣thered from the vulgar practice of the Chymists, who when they would sublime or distill Antimony, Sal Ar∣moniac, Sea-salt, Nitre, &c. are wont to beat them to powders to fa∣cilitate their receiving a further com∣minution by the action of the fire. Page  14 And here I observe, that in some bo∣dies this comminution ought not to be made onely at first, but to be con∣tinued afterwards. For Chymists find by experience, though perhaps with∣out considering the reason of it, that Sea-salt and Nitre, will very hardly afford their Spirits in Distillations, without they be mingled with pow∣dered clay or bole, or some such o∣ther additament, which usually twice or thrice exceeds the weight of the Salt it self: Although these addita∣ments, being themselves fixt, seem unlikely to promote the volatiliza∣tion of the bodies mixt with them, yet by hindering the small grains of Salt to melt together into one lump or masse, and consequently by keep∣ing them in the state of Comminuti∣on, they much conduce to the driving up of the Spirits or the finer parts of the Salts by the operation of the fire.
But to prosecute a little what I was saying of the Conduciveness of bringing a body into small parts to Page  15 the volatilization of it, I shall add, that in some cases the Comminution may be much promoted by employ∣ing Physical, after Mechanical, ways; and that, when the parts are brought to such a pitch of exiguity, they may be elevated much better than before. Thus, if you take filings of Mars, and mix them with Sal Armoniack, some few parts may be sublimed; but if, as I have done, you dissolve those fi∣lings in good Spirit of Salt instead of Oil of Vitriol, and having coagula∣ted the solution, you calcine the gree∣nish Crystalls or vitriolum Martis that will be afforded, you may with ease, and in no long time, obtain a Crocus Martis of very fine parts; so that I remember, when we exquisitely min∣gled this very fixt powder with a convenient proportion of Sal Armo∣niac, and gradually press'd it with a competent fire, we were able to ele∣vate at the first Sublimation a consi∣derable part of it; and adding a like, or somewhat inferiour, proportion of fresh Sal Armoniac to the Caput Mor∣tuum,Page  16 we could raise so considerable a part of that also, and in it of the Crocus, that we thought, if we had had Conveniency to pursue the ope∣ration, we should, by not many re∣peated Sublimations, have elevated the whole Crocus, which (to hint that upon the by,) afforded a Sublimat of so very astringent a Tast, as may make the trial of it in stanching of blood, stopping of fluxes, and other cases, where potent astriction is de∣sired, worthy of a Physicians Curio∣sity.
CHAP. IV.
THE second means to volatilize bodies is, to rub, grind, or o∣therwise reduce their corpuscles to be either smooth, or otherwise fitly shaped to clear themselves, or be dis∣intangled from each other.
By reason of the minuteness of the corpuscles, which keeps them from being separately discernible by the Page  17 Eye, 'tis not to be expected, that im∣mediate and ocular Instances should be given on this occasion; but that such a change is to be admitted in the small parts of many bodies, brought to be volatile, seems highly proba∣ble from the account formerly given of the requisites or conditions of Vo∣latility, whose introduction into a portion of matter will scarce be ex∣plicated without the intervention of such a change. To this second Instru∣ment of Volatilization, in concur∣rence with the first, may probably be referred the following Phaenome∣na: In the two first of which there is imployed no additional volatile In∣gredient; and in the fourth, a fixt body is disposed to volatility by the operation of a Liquour, though this be carefully abstracted from it.
1. If Urine freshly made be put to distill, the Phlegm will first ascend, and the Volatile salt will not rise 'till that be almost totally driven away, and then requires a not inconsidera∣ble degree of fire to elevate it. But, Page  18 if you putrefie or digest Urine, though in a well-closed Glass-Vessel, for seven or eight weeks, that gentle warmth will make the small parts so rub against, or otherwise act upon, one another, that the finer ones of the Salt will perhaps be made more slender and light, and however will be made to extricate themselves so far as to become volatile, and, a∣scending in a very gentle heat, leave the greatest part of the phlegm be∣hind them.
2. So, if Must, or the sweet juice of Grapes, be distilled before it have been fermented, 'tis observed by Chymists, and we have tried the like in artificial Wine made of Raisins, that the phlegm, but no ardent Spirit, will ascend. But when this Liquour is reduced to Wine by fermentation, which is accompanied with a great and intestine commotion of the just∣ling parts, hitting and rubbing against one another, whereby some proba∣bly come to be broken, others to be variously ground and subtilized, the Page  19 more subtile parts of the Liquour be∣ing extricated, or some of the parts being, by these operations, brought to be subtile, they are qualified to be raised by a very gentle heat be∣fore the phlegm, and convene into that fugitive Liquour, that Chymists, for its activity, call Spirit of Wine. Nor is it onely in the slighter Instan∣ces afforded by Animals and Vegeta∣bles, that Volatility may be effected by the means lately mentioned: For experience hath assured me, that 'tis possible, by an artificial and long di∣gestion, wherein the parts have lei∣sure for frequent justlings and attriti∣ons, so to subtilize and dispose the corpuscles even of common Salt for Volatility, that we could make them ascend in a moderate fire of Sand without the help of Bole, Oil of Vi∣triol, or any Volatilizing additament; and, which is more considerable, the Spirit would in rising precede the Phlegm, and leave the greatest part thereof behind it.
This intestine commotion of parts Page  20 capable of producing Volatility in the more disposed portions of a body, though it be much more easie to be found in Liquours, or in moist and soft bodies, yet I have sometimes, though rarely, met with it in dry ones. And particularly I remember, that some years ago having, for trial sake, taken Mustard-seed, which is a body pregnant with subtile parts, and caused it to be distilled per se in a Re∣tort, I had, as I hoped, (without any more ado,) a great many grains of a clear and figured Volatile salt at the very first distillation: which Experi∣ment having, for the greater securi∣ty, made a second time with the like success, I mentioned it to some Lo∣vers of Chymistry, as what I justly supposed they had not heard of. I leave it to farther Inquiry, whether, in a body so full of Spirits as Mustard-seed, the action and re-action of the parts among themselves, perhaps pro∣moted by just degrees of fire, might not suffice to make in them a change equivalent in order to Volatilization, Page  21 and▪ the yielding a Volatile Salt, to that which we have observed Fermen∣tation and Putrefaction to have made in the juice of Grapes, Urine, and some other bodies. How far the like success may be expected in other Tri∣alls, I cannot tell; especially not ha∣ving by me any Notes of the events of some Attempts which that Inquiry put me upon: Onely I remember in general, that, as some trials, I made with other Seeds, and even with A∣romatick ones, did not afford me any Volatile Salt; so the success of other trials made me now and then think, that some subjects of the Vegetable kingdom, whence we are wont to drive over acid Spirits, but no dry Salt, may be distilled with so luckily regulated a heat, as to afford some∣thing, though but little, of Volatile Salt; and that perhaps more bodies would be found to doe so, were they not too hastily or violently prest by the fire, whereby such saline sche∣matisms of the desired parts of the matter are (by being dissipated or Page  22 confounded) destroyed or vitiated; as in a slow, dextrous, or fortunate way of management would come forth, not in a liquid, but a saline form. Of which Observation we may elsewhere mention some Instan∣ces, and shall before the close of this paper name one, afforded us by crude Tartar.
3. Though Silver be one of the fixedst bodies that we know of, yet that 'tis not impossible but that, chief∣ly by a change of Texture, it may strangely be disposed to Volatility, I was induced to think by what I re∣member once happened to me. A Gentleman of my acquaintance, stu∣dious of Chymical Arcana, having lighted on a strange Menstruum, which he affirmed, and I had some cause to believe, not to be corrosive, he abstracted it from several metalls, (for the same Liquour would serve again and again,) and brought me the Remainders, with a desire that I would endeavour to reduce those of Lead and Silver into the pristine me∣tals Page  23 again, which he had in vain at∣tempted to doe: whereupon, though I found the white Calx of Lead re∣ducible, yet when I came to the Calx of Silver, I was not able to bring it into a body; and having at length melted some Lead in a gentle fire, to try whether I could make it swallow up the Calx, in order to a farther o∣peration, I was not a little surprized to find, that this mild heat made the Calx of Silver presently fly away and sublime in the form of a farina volati∣lis, which whitened the neighbouring part of the Chimney, as well as the upper part of the Crucible.
4. From that which Chymists themselves tell us, I think we may draw a good Argument ad hominem, to prove, that Volatility depends much upon the texture and other Mechanical affections of a body. For divers of those Hermetick Philoso∣phers (as they are called) that write of the Elixir, tell us, that when their Philosophick Mercury or grand Sol∣vent, being sealed up together with a Page  24 third or fourth part of Gold in a glass-Egg, is kept in convenient degrees of fire, the whole matter, and conse∣quently the Gold, will, by the mutu∣al operation of the included Substan∣ces, be so changed, that not onely 'twill circulate up and down in the glass, but, in case the digestion or de∣coction should be broken off at a cer∣tain inconvenient time, the Gold would be quite spoil'd, being, by the past and untimely-ended operation, made too Volatile to be reducible a∣gain into Gold: whereas, if the decoc∣tion be duly continued unto the end, not onely the Gold, but all the Philo∣sophical Mercury or Menstruum will be turned into a Sulphur or powder of a wonderfully fixt nature. I know, there are several Chrysopaeans, that speak much otherwise of this Opera∣tion, and tell us, that the Gold im∣ployed about it must be Philosophick Gold: But I know too, that there are divers others (and those too none of the least candid or rational) that speak of it as I have done; and That Page  25 is sufficient to ground an Argument on towards all those that embrace Their doctrine. And in this case 'tis considerable, that 'tis not by any superadded additament, that the most fixt body of Gold is made volatile, but the same massy matter, consi∣sting of Gold and Philosophick Mer∣cury, is, by the change of texture produced or occasioned by the va∣rious degrees and operations of fire upon it, brought to be first Volatile, and then extreamly fixt. And having said this in reference to one tribe of the Modern Spagyrists; to another of them, the Helmontians, I think I can offer a good Argument ad hominem from the Testimony and Experiments of the Founder of their Sect.
5. The acute Hemont, among o∣ther prodigious powers that he a∣scribes to the Alkahest, affirms, that, by abstracting it frequently enough, it would so change all tangible bo∣dies, and consequently stones and metals, that they might be distilled over into Liquours equiponderant Page  26 to the respective bodies that afforded them, and having all the Qualities of Rain-water; which if they have, I need not tell you that they must be very Volatile. And I see not how those that admit the Truth of this strange Alkahestical operation, can well deny, that Volatility depends upon the Mechanical affections of matter, since it appears not, that the Alkahest does, at least in our case, work upon bodies otherwise than Mechanically. And it must be con∣fest, that the same material parts of a portion of corporeal substance, which, when they were associated and contexted (whether by an Arche∣us, seed, form, or what else you please,) after such a determinate man∣ner, constituted a solid and fixt bo∣dy, as a Flint or a lump of Gold; by having their Texture dissolved; and (perhaps after being subtilized) by being freed from their former impli∣cations or firm cohesions, may be∣come the parts of a fluid body total∣ly Volatile.
Page  27
CHAP. V.
THE fourth means of making a body Volatile is, by associa∣ting the particles to be raised with such as are more Volatile than them∣selves, and of a figure fit to be fastened to them, or are at least apt, by be∣ing added to them, to make up with them corpuscles more disposed than they to Volatility. This being the grand Instrument of Volatilization, I shall spend somewhat the more time about it: But I shall first here a little explain the last clause, (that I may not be obliged to resume it elsewhere,) by intimating, that 'tis not impossible, that the particles of an additament, though not more volatile than those of the body 'tis mixt with, and per∣haps though not volatile at all, will yet conduce to volatilize the body wherewith 'tis mingled. For the par∣ticles of the additament may be of such figures, and so associated with those of the body to be elevated, Page  28 as in this to enlarge the former pores, or produce new ones, by intercep∣ting little cavities (for they must not be great ones) between the particles of a body to be raised, and those of the additament. For, by these and other such ways of association, the corpuscles, resulting from the com∣bination or coalition of two or more of these differing particles, may, without becoming too big and un∣wieldy, become more conveniently shaped, or more light in proportion to their bulk, and so more easily buoyed up and sustained in the air, (as when the Lid of a Copper-box being put on, makes the whole box emerge and swim in water, because of the intercepted cavity, though nei∣ther of the parts of the box would doe so,) or otherwise more fitted for avolation than the particles them∣selves were before their being joined to those of the additament.
By two things chiefly the corpu∣scles of the additament may contri∣bute to the elevation of a body. For Page  29first, the parts of the former may be much more disposed for avolation than is necessary to their own Vola∣tility. As when in the making of Sal Armoniac, the saline particles of Urine and of Soot are more fugitive than they need be to be themselves sublimed, and thereby are advanta∣ged to carry up with them the more sluggish corpuscles whereof Sea-salt consists. And next, they may be of figures so proper to fasten them well to the body to be elevated, that the more fugitive will not be driven a∣way or disjoyned from the more fixt by such a degree of Heat as is suffici∣ent to raise them both together: To which effect the congruity or figura∣tion is as well required, as the light∣ness or volatility of the particles of the additament. And therefore some of the fugitivest bodies that we know, as Spirit of Wine, Cam∣phire, &c. will not volatilize many bodies which will be elevated by far less fugitive additaments; because the corpuscles of Spirit of Wine stick Page  30 not to those of the body they are mingled with, but, easily flying up themselves, leave those behind them, which they did rather barely touch than firmly adhere to: Whereas far less fugacious Liquours, if they be indowed with figures that fit them for a competently firm cohesion with the body they are mingled with, will be able to volatilize it. Of which I shall now give you some Instances in bodies that are very ponderous, or very fixt, or both.
And I shall begin with Colcothar, though it being a vitriolate calx, made by a lasting and vehement fire, 'tis (consequently) capable of resisting such a one. This being exquisitely ground with an equal weight of Sal Armoniac, which is it self a Salt but moderately volatile, will be in good part sublimed into those yellow Flowers, which we have elsewhere more particularly taught to prepare, under the name of Ens primum Vene∣ris; in which, that many vitriolate corpuscles of the Colcothar are really Page  31 elevated, you may easily find by put∣ting a grain or two of that reddish Substance into a strong infusion of Galls, which will thereby immediate∣ly acquire an inky colour.
Steel also, which, to deserve that name, must have endured extraordi∣nary violences of the fire, and grea∣ter than is needfull to obtain other metalls from their Mother Earth; Steel it self, I say, being reduced to filings, and diligently ground with a∣bout an equal weight of Sal Armo∣niac, will, if degrees of fire be skil∣fully administred, (for 'tis easie to err in that point,) without any pre∣vious calcination or reduction to a Crocus, suffer so much of the metall to be carried up, as will give the Sal Armoniac a notable colour, and an ironish tast.
And here it will be proper to ob∣serve, for the sake of practical Chy∣mists, that the Quantity or Propor∣tion of the Volatile additament is to be regarded; though not so much as its Nature, yet more than it is wont Page  32 to be: And divers bodies, that are thought either altogether unfit for Sublimation, or at least uncapable to have any considerable portion of them elevated, may be copiously e∣nough sublimed, if a greater propor∣tion of the additament, than we usual∣ly content our selves with, be skil∣fully imployed. And in the new∣ly-mentioned Instance of Filings of Steel, if, in stead of an equal weight of Sal Armoniac, the treble weight be taken, and the operation be duly managed, a far greater quan∣tity of the metall may be raised, espe∣cially if fresh Sal Armoniac be care∣fully ground with the Caput Mortuum. And Sal Armoniac may perhaps be compounded with such other bodies, heavier than it self, as may qualifie it, when it is thus clogged, to elevate some congruous bodies better than it would of it self alone. And I shall venture to add this farther Ad∣vertisement, That if, besides the plen∣ty of the additament, there be a suf∣ficient fitness of its particles to lay Page  33 hold on those of the body to be wrought on, Mineral bodies, and those ponderous enough, may be em∣ployed to volatilize other heavy bo∣dies. And I am apt to think, that al∣most, if not more than almost, all Metalls themselves may by copious additaments and frequent Cohobati∣ons be brought to pass through the neck of the Retort in distillation; and perhaps, if you melt them not with equal parts, but with many parts of Regulus of Antimony, and then proceed as the hints now given will direct you, you will not find cause to despise what I have been saying.
You know what endeavours have been, and are still fruitlessly, imployed by Chymists to elevate so fixt a body as Salt of Tartar by additaments. I shall not now speak much of the en∣terprize in generall, designing chief∣ly to tell you on this occasion, that, whereas frequent experience shews, that Sal Armoniac being abstracted from Salt of Tartar, not onely the Page  34 Salt of Tartar is left at the bottom, but a good part of the Sal Armoniac is left behind with it; I suspected the cause might be, that Sal Armoniac, by the operation of the Alkaly of Tartar, is reduced into Sea-salt, and Urinous or fuliginous Salt, as 'twas at first composed of those differing In∣gredients; and that by this means the volatil Salt being loosened or disintangled from the rest, and being of a very fugacious Nature, flyes easily away it self, without staying long enough to take up any other Salt with it. And therefore, if this Analysis of the Sal Armoniac could be prevented, it seemed not impos∣sible to me, that some part of the Salt of Tartar, as well as of Colco∣thar and Steel, might be carried up by it: And accordingly having cau∣sed the Ingredients to be exceedingly well dryed, and both nimbly and carefully mixt, and speedily exposed to the fire, I have sometimes had a portion of Salt of Tartar carried up with the Sal Armoniac: but this hap∣pened Page  35 so very rarely, that I suspected some peculiar fitness for this work in some parcels of Sal Armoniac, that are scarce but by the effect to be dis∣cerned from others. But however, what has happened to us may argue the Possibility of the thing, and may serve to shew the volatilizing efficacy of Sal Armoniac; which is a Com∣pound, that I elsewhere recommend, and doe it now again, as one of the usefullest Productions of vulgar Chy∣mistry.
And since I have mentioned the Volatilization of Salt of Tartar, pre∣suming your Curiosity will make you desire my Opinion about the Possibi∣lity of it, I shall propose to you a distinction, that perhaps you doe not expect, by saying, that I think there is a great deal of difference between the making a Volatile Salt of Tartar, and the making Salt of Tartar Vo∣latile. For, though this seem to be but a Nicety, yet really it is none; and it is very possible, that a man may from Tartar obtain a Volatile salt, Page  36 and yet be no wise able to volatilize that Tartareous Salt, that has been once by the incineration of the Tar∣tar brought to fixt Alkaly. I have in the Sceptical Chymist summarily delivered a way, by which both I, and some Spagyrists that learned it of me, obtained from a mixture of Antimony, Nitre, and crude Tartar, a Volatil salt, which in probability comes from the last named of those three bodies; but experience care∣fully made has assured me, that with∣out any additament, by a distillation warily and very slowly made, (inso∣much that I have spent near a week in distilling one pound of matter) very clean Tartar, or at least the Crystalls of Tartar, may, in conve∣niently shaped Vessels, be brought to afford a Substance that in Recti∣fication will ascend to the upper part of the Vessel, in the form of a Vola∣til Salt, as if it were of Urine or of Harts-horne; of which (Tartareous) Salt, I keep some by me: But this operation requires not onely a dex∣terous, Page  37 but a patient distiller.
But now as to the making a fixt Alkaly of Tartar become Volatil, I take it to be another, and have found it to be a far more difficult, work; the common Processes of performing it being wont to promise much more than they can make good; which I may justly say of some other, that private men have vaunted for great Arcana, but upon triall have satisfied me so little, that I have divers times offered pretenders to make Salt of Tartar Volatil, that without at all inquiring into their Processes, I would lay good wagers, that they could not doe what they pretended; not onely as divers Philosophical Spagyrists re∣quire, without any visible additament, but by any additament whatever; provided I were allowed to bring the Salt of Tartar my self, and to examine the Success, not by what may appear in the Alembic and Receiver, but by the weight of what would remain in the bottom. For I have convin∣ced some of the more Ingenuous Ar∣tists, Page  38 that the Salt that sublimed was not indeed the Alkaly of Tartar, but somewhat that was by the operation produced, or rather extricated out of the additaments. But yet I would not be thought to affirm, that 'tis not possible to elevate the fixt Salt of Tartar. For sometimes I have been able to doe it, even at the first Di∣stillation, by an artificial additament perhaps more fixt than it self; but, though the operation was very grate∣full to me, as it shewed the Possibili∣ty of the thing, yet the paucity of the Salt sublimed and other Circum∣stances, kept me from much valuing it upon any other account. And there are other wayes, whereby Experi∣ence has assured me, that Salt of Tartar may be raised. And if one of them were not so uncertain, that I can never promise before hand that it will at all succeed, and the other so laborious, difficult and costly, that few would attempt or be able to practice it, I should think them ve∣ry valuable things; since by the for∣mer Page  39 way most part of the Salt of Tartar was quickly brought over in the form of a Liquor, whose pier∣cing smell was scarce tolerable; and by the latter way some Salt of Tar∣tar of my own, being put into a Re∣tort, and urged but with such a fire as could be given in a portable Sand∣furnace, there remained not at the bottom near one half of the first weight, the additament having car∣ried up the rest, partly in the form of a Liquor, but chiefly in that of a white Sublimate, which was neither ill-sented, nor in tast corrosive, or alcalizat, but very mild, and some∣what sweetish. And I doe not much doubt, but that by other wayes the fixt Alkaly of Tartar may be eleva∣ted, especially if, before it be expo∣sed to the last operation of the fire, it be dextrously freed from the most of those Earthy and Viscous parts, that I think may be justly suspected to clog and bind the truly saline ones.
But I have too long digrest, and therefore shall intimate onely upon Page  40 the by, that even the spurious Sal Tartari volatilized that is made with Spirit of Vinegar, may, if it be well prepared, make amends for its Empy∣reumatical smell and tast, and may, notwithstanding them, in divers ca∣ses be of no despicable use, both as a Medicine, and a Menstruum.
CHAP. VI.
BEfore I draw towards a Conclu∣sion of these Notes about Vo∣latility, perhaps it will not be amiss, to take notice of a Phaenomenon, which may much surprise, and some∣times disappoint those that deal in Sublimations, unless they be fore∣warned of it. For though it be taken for granted, and for the most part may justly be so, that by carefully mingling what is sublimed with what remains, and re-subliming the mix∣ture, a greater quantity of the bo∣dy to be sublimed may be elevated the second time than was the first, Page  41 and the third time than the second, and so onwards; yet I have not found this Rule alwayes to hold, but in some Bodies, as particularly in some kinds of dulcified Colcothar, the Sal Armoniac, would at the first Sublima∣tion carry up more of the fixed pow∣der, than at the second or third. So that I was by several Tryalls per∣swaded, when I found a very well and highly coloured powder eleva∣ted, to lay it by for use, and thereby save my self the labour of a prose∣cution, that would not onely have proved useless, but prejudicial. And if I misremember not, by often re∣peated Cohobations, (if I may so call them) of Sal Armoniac upon crude or Mineral Antimony, though the Sublimate that was obtained by the first Operation, was much of it vari∣ously, and in some places richly, co∣loured; yet afterwards, the Salt a∣scended from time to time paler and paler, leaving the Antimony behind it. Which way of making some Minerals more fixt and fusible I con∣ceive Page  42 may be of great use in some Medicinal Preparations, though I think it not fit to particularize them in this place: Where my chief in∣tent was, to mention the Phaenome∣non it self, and invite you to con∣sider, whether it may be ascribed to this, that by the reiterated action of the fire, and grinding together of the body to be raised, either the corpu∣scles of the Sal Armoniac, or those of the other body, may have those little hooked or equivalent particles, whereby they take hold of one an∣other, broken or worn off; and whe∣ther the indisposedness of the Colco∣tharine or Antimonial parts to ascend, may not in some cases be promoted by their having, by frequent attriti∣ons, so smoothed their Surfaces that divers of them may closely adhere, like pieces of polished Glass, and so make up Clusters too unweildy to be so raised, as the single corpuscles they consist of, were. Which change may dispose them to be at once less Volatil and more Fusible. Which Page  43 Conjectures I mention to excite you to frame better, or at least to make amends for my omission of examin∣ing these, by trying whether the Sal Armoniac grown white again will be as fit as it was at first to carry up fresh bodies; and also by observing the weight of the unelevated part, and employing those other wayes of examen, which I should have done, if I had not then made Subli∣mations for another end, than to clear up the Doctrine of Volati∣lity.
And here it may be profitable to some Chymists, though not necessary to my Subject, to intimate, that Sub∣limations may be useful to make very fine Comminutions of divers bodies. That those that are elevated are re∣duced to a great fineness of parts, is obvious to be observed in many Ex∣amples, whence it has been ancient∣ly, not absurdly, said, that Sublima∣tions are the Chymists Pestles, since (as in Flowers of Sulphur and Anti∣mony) they do really resolve the Page  44 elevated bodies into exceeding fine Flower, and much finer than Pestles and Mortars are wont to bring them to. But that which I intend in this Paragraph is not a thing so obvious, since 'tis to observe, that sometimes even bodies so fixt as not at all to a∣scend in Sublimation, may yet be re∣duced by that operation into pow∣ders extreamly fine. For exemplify∣ing of which, I shall put you in mind, that though Spagyrists complain much of the Difficulty of making a good Calx of Gold, and of the Imperfe∣ction of the few ordinary processes prescribed to make it, (which would be more complained of, but that Chymical Physicians seldom attempt to prepare it,) yet we are informed by triall, that by exactly grinding a thick amalgam of Gold and Mercury with a competent weight, (at least equal to its own) of finely powdered Sulphur, we may, by putting the mixture to su∣blime in a conveniently shaped Glass, by degrees of fire obtain a Cinaber that will leave behind it a finer Calx Page  45 of Gold than will be had by some far more difficult processes.
But 'tis now time to draw towards a Conclusion of our Notes about Vo∣latility; which Quality depends so much upon the contexture of the corpuscles that are to be raised to∣gether, that even very ponderous bodies may serve for volatilizing ad∣ditaments, if they be disposed to fa∣sten themselves sufficiently to the bo∣dies they are to carry up along with them. For, though Lead be, save one, the heaviest solid we know of, and though Quick-silver be the heaviest body in the world, except Gold; yet trialls have assured us, that Quick-silver it self being united by Amalgamation with a small pro∣portion of Lead, will by a fire that is none of the violentest, and in close Vessels, be made to carry over with it some of the Lead. As we clearly found by the increased weight of the Quick-silver that passed into the Receiver; which, by the way, may make us cautious how we conclude Quick∣silver Page  46 to be pure, meerly from its ha∣ving been distilled over.
There remains but one body more heavy than those I come from naming, and that is Gold; which, be∣ing also of a fixity so great that 'tis in∣deed admirable, I doe not wonder that not onely the more wary Natu∣ralists, but the more severe among the Chymists themselves should think it incapable of being volatilized. But yet, if we consider, how very minute parts Gold may be rational∣ly supposed to consist of, and to be divisible into, me thinks it should not seem impossible, that, if men could light on Volatil Salts endowed with figures fit to stick fast to the corpu∣scles of the Gold, they would carry up with them bodies, whose solidity can scarce be more extraordinary than their minuteness is: And in ef∣fect, we have made more than one Menstruum, with which some particles of Gold may be carried up. But when I employed that which I recom∣mended to you formerly under the Page  47 name of Menstruum peracutum (which consists mainly, and sometimes onely, of Spirit of Nitre, several times drawn from Butter of Antimony,) I was able, without a very violent fire, in a few hours to elevate so much crude Gold, as, in the neck of the Retort, afforded me a considerable Quantity of Sublimate, which I have had red as blood, and whose consisting partly of Gold manifestly appeared by this, that I was able with ease to reduce that metall out of it.
In reckoning up the Instruments of Volatilization, we must not quite leave out the mention of the Air, which I have often observed to faci∣litate the elevation of some bodies even in close Vessels; wherein, though to fill them too full be judged by ma∣ny a Compendious practise, because the streams have a less way to ascend, yet Experience has several times in∣formed me, that, at least in some ca∣ses, they take wrong measures, and that (to pass by another Cause of their disappointment) a large propor∣tion Page  48 of Air, purposely left in the Ves∣sels, may more than compensate the greater space that is to be ascended by the vapours or exhalations of the matter that is to be distilled or subli∣med. And if, in close Vessels, the presence of the Air may promote the ascension of bodies, it may well be expected, that the elevation of di∣vers of them may be furthered by being attempted in open Vessels, to which the Air has free access. And if we may give any credit to the pro∣bable Relations of some Chymists, the Air does much contribute to the volatilization of some bodies that are barely, though indeed for no short time, exposed to it. But the account on which the Air by its bare presence or peculiar operations conduces to the Volatilization of some bodies, is a thing very difficult to be determi∣ned, without having recourse to some Notions about Gravity and Levity, and of the Constitution of the cor∣puscles that compose the Air; which I take to be both very numerous and Page  49 no less various. And therefore I must not in these occasional Notes lanch out into such a Subject, though, for fear I should be blamed for too much slighting my old acquaintance the Air, I durst not quite omit the power it has to dispose some bodies to Volatility.
A moderate attention may suffice to make it be discerned, that in what hath been hitherto delivered, I have for the most part considered the small portions of matter, to be elevated in Volatilization, as intire Corpuscles: And therefore it may be now perti∣nent, to intimate in a Line or two, that there may be also Cases, where∣in a kind of Volatilization, improper∣ly so called, may be effected, by ma∣king use of such additaments as break off or otherwise divide the particles of the corpuscles to be elevated, and by adhering to, and so clogging, one of the particles to which it proves more congruous, inable the other, which is now brought to be more light or disingaged, to ascend. This Page  50 may be illustrated by what happens, when Sal Armoniac is well ground with Lapis Calaminaris or with some fix'd Alkali, and then committed to distillation: For the Sea-salt, that enters the Composition of the Sal Armoniac, being detained by the stone or the Alkali, there is a divorce made between the common Salt and the urinous and fuliginous Salts, that were incorporated with it, and being now disingaged from it, are easily e∣levated. I elsewhere mention, that I have observed in Man's Urine a kind of native Sal Armoniac, much less Volatile than the fugitive that is sublim'd from Man's Blood, Harts∣horn, &c. and therefore supposing, that a separation of parts may be made by an Alkali, as well in this Salt as in the common factitious Sal Ar∣moniac, I put to fresh Urine a con∣venient proportion (which was a plentifull one) of Salt of Pot-ashes (that being then at hand) and distil∣ling the Liquor, it yielded, accor∣ding to expectation, a Spirit more Vo∣latile Page  51 than the Phlegm, and of a ve∣ry piercing tast; which way of ob∣taining a Spirit without any violence of fire, and without either previ∣ously abstracting the Phlegm, (as we are fain to do in fresh Urine) or te∣diously waiting for the fermentation of stale Urine, I taught some Chy∣mists, because of the usefulness of Spirit of Urine; which being obtain∣ed this innocent way, would proba∣bly be employed with much less su∣spicion of corrosiveness, than if in the operation I had made use of Quick-lime. Another Illustration of what I was not long since saying, may be fetch'd from the Experiment of making Spirit of Nitre by mixing Salt-peter with Oil of Vitriol, and distilling them together: For the Oil does so divide or break the cor∣puscles of the Nitre, that the now-disposed particles of that Salt, which amount to a great portion of the whole, will be made easily enough to ascend even with a moderate fire of Sand, and sometimes without any Page  52 fire at all, in the form of Spirits, ex∣ceeding unquiet, subtle, and apt to moak a way.
To which Instances of this imper∣fect kind of Volatilization more might be added, but that you may well think, I have detain'd you but too long already with indigested Notes about one Quality.
CHAP. VII.
THe last means of Volatilizing bodies is, the operation of the Fire or some other actual Heat: But of this, which is obvious, it would be superfluous to discourse. Onely this I shall intimate, that there may be bodies, which, in such degrees of fire as are wont to be given in the vulgar operations of Chymists, will not be elevated, which yet may be forced up by such violent and lasting fires, as are employed by the Melters of Ores, and Founders of Guns, and sometimes by Glass-makers. And on Page  53 this Consideration I shall here ob∣serve to you, since I did not doe it at my entrance on these Notes, that Chymists are wont to speak, and I have accordingly been led to treat, of Volatility and Fixity in a popular sense of those Terms. For if we would consider the matter more strictly, I presume we should find that Volatility and Fixity are but re∣lative Qualities, which are to be esti∣mated, especially the former of them, by the degree of fire to which the body, whereto we ascribe one or other of those Qualities, is exposed; and therefore it is much more difficult than men are aware of, to determine accurately, when a body ought to be accounted Volatile and when not; since there is no determinate degree of Heat agreed on, nor indeed easie to be devised, that may be as a stan∣dard, whereby to measure Volatility and Fixtness: And 'tis obvious, that a body, that remains fixt in one de∣gree of fire, may be forced up by a∣nother. To which may be added, Page  54 agreeably to what I lately began to observe, that a body may pass for absolutely fixt among the generality of Chymists, and yet be unable to persevere in the fires of Founders and Glass-makers: Which brings into my mind, that not having observed, that Chymists have examined the Fixity of other bodies than metalline ones by the Cupel, I had the Curiosity to put dry Salt of Tartar upon it, and found, as I expected, that in no long time it manifestly wasted in so vehe∣ment a heat, wherein also the Air came freely at it, (though Quick-lime, handled after the same way, lost not of its weight,) and having well mix∣ed one ounce of good Salt of Tar∣tar with treble its weight of Tobac∣co-pipe Clay, we kept them but for two, or at most three hours, in a strong fire; yet the Crucible being purposely left uncovered, we found the Salt of Tartar so wasted, that the remaining mixture (which was not flux'd) afforded us not near a quarter of an ounce of Salt. And indeed I Page  55 scarce doubt, but that in strictness di∣vers of those bodies that pass for ab∣solutely fixt, are but semi-fixt, or at least but comparatively and relative∣ly fix'd, that is, in reference to such degrees of fire, as they are wont to be exposed to in the Distillations, Sublimations, &c. of Chymists; not such as are given in the raging fires of Founders, and Glass-makers. And per∣haps even the fires of Glass-makers and Say-masters themselves are not the most intense that may possibly be made in a short time, provided there be but small portions of matter to be wrought on by them. And in effect, I know very few bodies, be∣sides Gold, that will perserve totally fixt in the vehementest degrees of fire that Trials have made me acquainted with. And I elsewhere tell you, that, though Tin, in our Chymical Rever∣beratories themselves, is wont to be reduced but into a Calx that is repu∣ted very fixt; yet in those intense fires, that a Virtuoso of my acquain∣tance uses in his Tin-Mines, there is Page  56 not seldom found quantities of Tin carried up to a notable height in the form of a whitish powder, which, being in good masses forced off from the places to which it had fastened it self, does by a skillful reduction yield many a pound weight of good mal∣leable metal, which seemed to me to be rather more, than less, fine than ordinary Tin.
Postscript,
Relating to Page 15. of this Tract; and here annext for their sakes, who have a mind to repeat the Experiment there delivered, that so they may know the quantities employed in it.
WIth two parts of this Crocus we ground very well three parts of Sal Armoniac, and having sublimed them in a strong fire, we took off the high coloured Sublimat, and put in either an equal weight, or a weight exceeding it by half, to the Caput Mortuum, we found after the second Subli∣mation, which was also high coloured, that of an ounce of Crocus we had raised six drams, that is, three quarters of the whole weight.
FINIS.
Page  [unnumbered]
EXPERIMENTAL NOTES OF The Mechanical Origine OR PRODƲCTION OF FIXTNESS.
LONDON, Printed by E. Flesher, for R. Davis Bookseller in Oxford. 1675.
Page  [unnumbered]Page  3OF The Mechanical Origine OR PRODƲCTION OF FIXTNESS.
CHAP. I.
FIXITY being the opposite Qua∣lity to Volatility, what we have discoursed about the latter, will make the nature of the former more easily understood, and upon that account allow me to make somewhat the quicker dispatch of what I have to say of it.
Page  4 The Qualifications that conduce most to the Fixity of a portion of mat∣ter, seem to be these.
First, the grossness or the bulk of the corpuscles it consists of. For if these be too big, they will be too unwieldly and unapt to be carried up into the Air by the action of such mi∣nute particles as those of the Fire, and will also be unfit to be buoyed up by the weight of the Air; as we see, that Vapours, whilst they are such, are small enough to swim in the Air, but can no longer be sustained by it, when they convene into drops of rain or flakes of snow. But here it is to be observed, that when I speak of the corpuscles that a fixt body consists of, I mean not either its Elementary or its Hypostatical Principles, as such, but onely those very little masses or clusters of particles, of what kind so∣ever they be, that stick so firmly to one another, as not to be divisible and dissipable by that degree of fire in which the body is said to be fixt; so that each of those little Concreti∣ons, Page  5 though it may it self be made up of two, three, or more particles of a simpler nature, is considered here per modum Ʋnius, or as one intire cor∣puscle. And this is one Qualification conducive to the Fixtness of a bo∣dy.
The next is the ponderousness or solidity of the corpuscles it is made up of. For if these be very solid, and (which solid and compact bodies usually are) of a considerable speci∣fick gravity, they will be too heavy to be carried up by the effluvia or the action of the fire, and their pon∣derousness will make them as unwiel∣dy, and indisposed to be elevated by such Agents, as the grossness of their bulk would make bigger corpuscles, but of a proportionably inferiour specifick weight. On which account the calces of some metals and mine∣rals, as Gold, Silver, &c. though, by the operation of Solvents, or of the fire, or of both, reduced to powders exceedingly subtile, will resist such vehement fires, as will easily drive Page  6 up bigger, but less heavy and com∣pact, corpuscles, than those calces consist of.
The third Qualification that con∣duces to the Fixity of a body, be∣longs to its Integral parts, not barely as they are several parts of it, but as they are aggregated or contexed in∣to one body. For, the Qualification, I mean, is the ineptitude of the com∣ponent corpuscles for avolation, by reason of their branchedness, irre∣gular figures, crookedness, or other inconvenient shape, which intangles the particles among one another, and makes them difficult to be extricated; by which means, if one of them do ascend, others, wherewith 'tis com∣plicated, must ascend with it; and, whatever be the account on which divers particles stick firmly together, the aggregate will be too heavy or unwieldy to be raised. Which I therefore take notice of, because that, though usually 'tis on the rough∣ness and irregularity of corpuscles, that their cohesion depends; yet it Page  7 sometimes happens, that the smooth∣ness and flatness of their surfaces makes them so stick together, as to resist a total divulsion; as may be illustrated by what I have said of the cohesion of polished marbles and the plates of glass, and by the fixity of glass it self in the fire.
From this account of the Causes or Requisites of Fixity, may be dedu∣ced the following means of giving or adding Fixation to a body, that was before either Volatile, or less fixt. These means may be reduced to two general Heads; First, the action of the Fire, as the parts of the body, exposed to it, are thereby made to operate variously on one another. And next, the association of the par∣ticles of a volatile body with those of some proper additament: Which term, [of proper] I rather imploy than that, one would expect, [of fixt;] because 'twill ere long appear, that, in certain cases, some volatile bodies may more conduce to the fixation of other volatile bodies, than some fixt Page  8 Ones doe. But these two Instruments of Fixation being but general, I shall propose four or five more particular ones.
CHAP. II.
AND first, in some cases it may conduce to Fixation, that, either by an additament, or by the operati∣on of the fire, the parts of a body be brought to touch each other in large portions of their surfaces. For, that from such a contact there will follow such a mutual cohesion, as will at least indispose the touching corpu∣scles to suffer a total divulsion, may appear probable from what we late∣ly noted of the cohesion of pieces of marble and glass, and from some o∣ther Phaenomena belonging to the Hi∣story of Firmness, from which we may properly enough borrow some instances, as least for illustration, in the Doctrine of Fixtness, in regard that usually, though not always, Page  9 the same things that make a body Firm, give it some degree of Fixity, by keeping it from being dissipated by the wonted degrees of Heat, and Agitation it meets with in the Air. But to return to the contact we were speaking of, I think it not impossible, (though you may perhaps think it strange,) that the bare operation of the Fire may, in some cases, procure a Cohesion among the particles, (and consequently make them more Fixt,) as well as in others disjoyn them, and thereby make them more Volatile. For, as in some bodies, the figures and sizes of the corpuscles may be such, that the action of the fire may rub or tear off the little beards or hooks, or other particles that intangle them, and by that means make it more easie for the corpuscles to be disingaged and fly upwards; so in other bodies, the size and shape of the corpuscles may be such, that the agitation, cau∣sed by the fire, may rub them one against the other, so as by mutual at∣trition to grind, as 'twere, their Page  10 surfaces, and make them so broad and smooth, if not also so flat, as that the contact of the corpuscles shall come to be made according to a large portion of their superficies, from whence will naturally follow a firm Cohesion. Which I shall illustrate by what we may observe among those that grind glasses for Telescopes and Microscopes. For, these Artificers, by long rubbing a piece of glass a∣gainst a metalline Dish or concave Vessel, do by this attrition at length bring the two bodies to touch one another in so many parts of their congruous surfaces, that they will stick firmly to one another, so as sometimes to oblige the Work-man to use violence to disjoyn them. And this instance (which is not the sole I could alleage) may suffice to shew, how a Cohesion of corpuscles may be produced by the mutual ad∣aptation of their congruous surfa∣ces. And if two grosser corpuscles, or a greater number of smaller, be thus brought to stick together, you will Page  11 easily believe, their Aggregate will prove too heavy or unwieldy for a∣volation. And to shew, that the fire may effect a laevigation in the surfa∣ces of some corpuscles, I have some∣times caused Minium, and some o∣ther calces, that I judged convenient, to be melted for a competent time, in a vehement fire conveniently ad∣ministred; whereby, according to expectation, that which was before a dull and incoherent powder, was reduced into much grosser corpuscles, multitudes of whose grains appea∣red smooth, glittering, and almost specular, like those of fine litharge of gold; and the masses that these grains composed, were usually solid enough and of difficult fusion. And when we make glass of Lead per se, (which I elsewhere teach you how to doe,) 'tis plain, that the particles of the Lead are reduced to a great smoothness; since, wheresoever you break the glass, the surfaces, produ∣ced at the crack, will not be jagged, but smooth, and considerably specu∣lar. Page  12 Nor do I think it impossible, that, even when the fire does not make any great attrition of the Cor∣puscles of the body to be fixt, it may yet occasion their sticking together, because by long tumbling them up and down in various manners, it may at length, after multitudes of revo∣lutions and differing occursions, bring those of their surfaces together, which, by reason of their breadth, smoothness, or congruity of figure, are fit for mutual cohesion; and when once they come to stick, there is no necessity, that the same causes, that were able to make them pass by one another, when their contact was but according to an inconsiderable part of their surfaces, should have the same effect now, when their con∣tact is full; though perhaps, if the degree of fire were much increased, a more vehement agitation would surmount this cohesion, and dissipate again these clusters of coalescent cor∣puscles.
These conjectures will perhaps ap∣pear Page  13 less extravagant, if you consider what happens in the preparation of Quick-silver praecipitated per se. For there, running Mercury, being put into a conveniently shaped Glass, is exposed to a moderate fire for a con∣siderable time: (For I have some∣times found six or seven weeks to be too short a one.) In this degree of fire the parts are variously tumbled, and made many of them to ascend, till convening into drops on the sides of the glass, their weight carries them down again; but at length, after many mutual occursions, if not also attritions, some of the parts begin to stick together in the form of a red powder, and then more and more Mercurial particles are fastened to it, till at length all, or by much the greater part of the Mercury, is re∣duced into the like Praecipitate, which, by this cohesion of the parts, being grown more fixt, will not with the same degree of Heat be made to rise and circulate, as the Mercury would before; and yet, as I elsewhere note, Page  14 I have found by trial, that, with a greater and competent degree of heat, this Praecipitate per se, would, without the help of any volatilizing additament, be easily reduced into running Mercury again. Chymists and Physicians, who agree in suppo∣sing this Praecipitate to be made with∣out any additament, will perchance scarce be able to give a more likely account of the consistency and de∣gree of Fixity that is obtained in the Mercury; in which, since no bo∣dy is added to it, there appears not to be wrought any but a Mechanical change. And though, I confess, I have not been without suspicions, that in Philosophical strictness this Praecipitate may not be made per se, but that some penetrating igneous particles, especially saline, may have associated themselves with the Mer∣curial Corpuscles; yet even upon this supposition it may be said, that these particles contribute to the ef∣fect that is produced, but by facilita∣ting or procuring, by their oppor∣tune Page  15 Interposition, the mutual Cohe∣sion of Corpuscles that would not otherwise stick to one another.
Perhaps it will not be altogether impertinent to add, on this occasion, that, as for the generality of Chymists, as well others as Helmontians, that as∣sert the Transmutation of all metalls into Gold by the Philosopher's Stone, me thinks, they may grant it to be pro∣bable, that a new and fit Contexture of the parts of a volatile body may, especially by procuring a full contact among them, very much contribute to make it highly fixt. For, to omit what is related by less credible Au∣thours, 'tis averred, upon his own trial, by Helmont, who pretended not to the Elixir, that a grain of the pow∣der, that was given him, transmuted a pound (if I mis-remember not) of running Mercury; where the pro∣portion of the Elixir to the Mercury was so inconsiderable, that it cannot reasonably be supposed, that every Corpuscle of the Quick-silver, that before was volatile, was made ex∣treamly Page  16 fixt meerly by its Coalition with a particle of the powder, since, to make one grain suffice for this Coalition, the parts it must be divi∣ded into must be scarce conceivably minute, and therefore each single part not likely to be fixt it self, or at least more likely to be carried up by the vehemently agitated Mercury, than to restrain that from avolation; whereas, if we suppose the Elixir to have made such a commotion among the corpuscles of the Mercury, as (having made them perhaps somewhat change their figure, and expelled some inconvenient particles,) to bring them to stick to one another, according to very great portions of their surfaces, and intangle one another, it will not be disagreeable to the Mechanical Doctrine of Fixity, that the Mercury should, endure the fire as well as Gold, on the score of its new Tex∣ture, which, supposing the story true, appears to have been introdu∣ced, by the new colour, specifick gravity, Indissolubleness in Aqua Page  17 fortis, and other Qualities wherein Gold differs from Mercury, espe∣cially Malleableness, which, accor∣ding to our Notes about that Quali∣ty, usually requires that the parts, from whose union it results, be ei∣ther hooked, branched, or other∣wise adapted and fitted to make them take fast hold of one another, or stick close to one another. And since, in the whole mass of the factitious Gold, all save one grain must be ma∣terially the same body, which, before the projection was made, was Quick-silver, we may see how great a pro∣portion of volatile matter may, by an inconsiderable quantity of fixing additament, acquire such a new Dis∣position of its parts, as to become most fixt. And however, this In∣stance will agree much better with the Mechanical Doctrine about Fixi∣ty, than with that vulgar Opinion of the Chymists, (wherewith 'twill not at all comply,) That if, in a mix∣ture, the volatile part do much ex∣ceed the fixt, it will carry up that, Page  18 or at least a good portion thereof, with it; and on the contrary. But though this Rule holds in many cases, where there is no peculiar indispositi∣on to the effect that is aimed at; yet if the Mechanical affections of the bodies be ill suited to such a purpose, our Philosophical Experiment mani∣festly proves, that the Rule will not hold, since so great a multitude of grains of Mercury, in stead of carry∣ing up with them one grain of the Elixir, are detained by it in the stron∣gest fire. And thus much for the first way of fixing Volatile Bodies.
CHAP. III.
THE second way of producing Fixity, is by expelling, brea∣king, or otherwise disabling those volatile Corpuscles that are too in∣disposed to be fixt themselves, or are fitted to carry up with them such par∣ticles as would not, without their help, ascend. That the Expulsion Page  19 of such parts is a proper means to make the aggregate of those that re∣main more fixt, I presume you will not put me solicitously to prove; and we have a manifest instance of it in Soot, where, though many active parts were by the violence of the fire and current of the air carried up together by the more volatile parts; yet, when Soot is well distilled in a Retort, a competent time being gi∣ven for the extricating and avolation of the other parts, there will at the bottom remain a substance that will not now fly away, as it formerly did. And here let me observe, that the recesse of the fugitive corpuscles may contribute to the fixation of a body, not barely because the remaining matter is freed from so many unfixt, if not also volatilizing, parts; but, as it may often happen, that upon their recesse the pores or intervals, they left behind them, are filled up with more solid or heavy matter, and the body becomes, as more homogeneous, so more close and compact. And Page  20 whereas I intimated, that, besides the expulsion of unfit corpuscles, they may be otherwise disabled from hindering the fixation of the masse they belong to, I did it, because it seems very possible, that in some ca∣ses they may, by the action of the fire, be so broken, as with their frag∣ments to fill up the pores or intervals of the body they appertained to; or may make such coalitions with the particles of a convenient additament, as to be no impediment to the Fixity of the whole masse, though they re∣main in it. Which possibly you will think may well happen, when you shall have perused the Instances an∣next to the fourth way of fixing bo∣dies.
The third means of fixing, or lessening the Volatility of, bodies, is by preserving that rest among the parts, whose contrary is necessary to their Volatilization. And this may be done by preventing or checking that Heat, or other motion, which ex∣ternal Agents strive to introduce Page  21 into the parts of the proposed body. But this means tending rather to hin∣der the actual avolation of a portion of matter, or, at most, procure a tem∣porary abatement of its volatility, than to give it a stable fixity, I shall not any longer insist on it.
The fourth way of producing Fixity in a body, is by putting to it such an appropriated Additament, whether fixt or volatile, that the Corpuscles of the body may be put among themselves, or with those of the additament, into a complicated state, or intangled contexture. This being the usual and principal way of producing Fixity, we shall dwell somewhat the longer upon it, and give Instances of several degrees of Fixation. For, though they do not produce that quality in the strictest acceptation of the word, Fixity; yet 'tis usefull in our present inquiry, to take notice, by what means that volatility comes to be gradually aba∣ted, since that may facilitate our understanding, how the Volatility Page  22 of a body comes to be totally aba∣ted, and consequently the body to be fixt.
CHAP. IV.
AND first we find, that a fixt ad∣ditament, if its parts be conve∣niently shaped, may easily give a degree of fixity to a very volatile body. Thus Spirit of Nitre, that will of it self easily enough fly away in the Air, having its saline particles as∣sociated with those of fixt Nitre, or salt of Tartar, will with the Alkaly compose a salt of a Nitrous nature, which will endure to be melted in a Crucible without being deprived even of its Spirits. And I have found, that the spirits of Nitre, that abound in Aqua fortis, being concoagulated with the Silver they corrode, though one would not expect that such sub∣tile Corpuscles should stick fast to so compact and solid a body as Silver; yet Crystalls, produced by their Page  23 Coalition, being put into a Retort, may be kept a pretty while in fusion, before the metal will let go the Ni∣trous spirits. When we poured Oil of Vitriol upon the Calx of Vitriol, though many Phlegmatick and o∣ther Sulphureous particles were dri∣ven away by the excited Heat; yet the saline parts, that combined with the fixt ones of the Colcothar, stuck fast enough to them, not to be easily driven away. And if Oil of Vitriol be in a due proportion dropt upon Salt of Tartar, there results a Tarta∣rum vitriolatum, wherein the acid and alkalizate parts cohere so strong∣ly, that 'tis not an ordinary degree of fire will be able to disjoyn them. Insomuch that divers Chymists have (though very erroniously) thought this compounded Salt to be indestru∣ctible. But a less heavy liquour than the ponderous Oil of Vitriol may by an Alkaly be more strongly detained than that Oil it self; experience ha∣ving assured me, that Spirit of Salt being dropt to satiety upon a fixt Page  24 Alkaly, (I used either that of Nitre or of Tartar,) there would be made so strict an union, that, having, with∣out additaments, distilled the resulting salt with a strong and lasting fire, it appeared not at all considerably to be wrought upon, and was not so much as melted.
But 'tis not the bare Mixture or Commistion of Volatile particles with Fixt ones, (yea though the for∣mer be predominant in quantity,) that will suffice to elevate the latter. For, unlesse the figures of the latter be congruous and fitted to fasten to the other, the volatile parts will fly away in the Heat, and leave the rest as fixt as before: as when sand or ashes are wetted or drenched with water, they quickly part with that water, without parting with any de∣gree of their Fixity. But on the o∣ther side, it is not always necessary, that the body, which is fitted to destroy, or much abate, the volati∣lity of another substance, should be it self fixt. For, if there be a skilful Page  25 or lucky coaptation of the figures of the particles of both the bodies, these particles may take such hold of one another, as to compose corpu∣scles, that will neither by reason of their strict union be divided by Heat; nor by reason of their resulting gross∣ness be elevated even by a strong fire, or at least by such a degree of Heat as would have sufficed to raise more indisposed bodies than either of the separate Ingredients of the mix∣ture. This observation, if duly made out, does so much favour our Do∣ctrine about the Mechanical Origine of Fixation, and may be of such use, not onely to Chymists, in some of their operations, but to Philosophers, in as∣signing the causes of divers Phaenome∣na of Nature, that it may be worth while to exemplifie it by some In∣stances.
The first whereof I shall take from an usual practice of the Chymists themselves: which I the rather doe, to let you see, that such known Ex∣periments are too often over-looked Page  26 by them that make them, but yet may hint or confirm Theories to those that reflect on them. The In∣stance, I here speak of, is that which is afforded by the vulgar Prepara∣tion of Bezoardicum Minerale. For, though the rectified Butter or Oil of Antimony and the Spirit of Nitre, that are put together to make this white Praecipitate, are both of them distilled liquours; yet the copious powder, that results from their Union, is, by that Union of volatile parts, so far fixt, that, after they have edulcora∣ted it with water, they prescribe the calcining of it in a Crucible for five or six hours: which operation it could not bear, unless it had attained to a considerable fixation. This dis∣course supposes with the generality of Chymists, that the addition of a due quantity of spirit of Nitre, is necessary to be employed in making the Bezoardicum Minerale. But if it be a true Observation, which is attri∣buted to the Learned Guntherus Bil∣lichius, (but which I had no Furnace Page  27 at hand to examine when I heard of it,) if, I say, it be true, that a Bezo∣ardicum Minerale may be obtained, without spirit of Nitre, barely by a slow evaporation, made in a Glasse-dish, of the more fugitive parts of the Oil of Antimony; this Instance will not indeed be proper in this place, but yet will belong to the se∣cond of the foregoing ways of intro∣ducing Fixity. I proceed now to al∣leage other particulars in favour of the above-mentioned Observation.
If you take strong Spirit of Salt, that, when the Glass is unstopt, will smoak of it self in the cold air, and satiate it with the volatile Spirit of Ʋrine, the superfluous moisture be∣ing abstracted, you will obtain by this preparation (which, you may remember, I long since communica∣ted to you, and divers other Virtuosi,) a compounded Salt, scarce, if at all, distinguishable from Sal Armoniac, and which will not, as the Salts it consists of will doe, before their co∣alition, easily fly up of it self into the Page  28 air, but will require a not despicable degree of fire to sublime it.
Of these semivolatile Compositi∣ons of Salt I have made, and else∣where mentioned, others, which I shall not here repeat, but passe on to other Instances pertinent to our pre∣sent design.
I lately mentioned, that the Vola∣tility of the spirits of Nitre may be very much abated, by bringing them to coagulate into Crystalls with particles of corroded Silver; but I shall now add, that I guessed, and by trial found, that these Nitrous spi∣rits may be made much more fixt by the addition of the Spirit of Salt, which, if it be good, will of it self smoak in the Air. For, having dis∣solved a convenient quantity of Cry∣stalls of Silver in distilled water, and precipitated them, not with a Solution of Salt, but the Spirit of Salt; the phlegm being abstracted, and some few of the looser saline particles; though the remaining masse were prest with a violent fire that kept Page  29 the Retort red-hot for a good while; yet the Nitrous and Saline spirits would by no means be driven away from the Silver, but continued in fu∣sion with it; and when the masse was taken out, these Spirits did so abound in it, that it had no appearance of a Metal, but looked rather like a thick piece of Horn.
The next Instance I shall name is afforded us by that kind of Turbith, which may be made by Oil of Vitriol, in stead of the Aqua fortis imployed in the common Turpethum Minerale. For, though Oil of Vitriol be a distilled liquour, and Mercury a body volatile enough; yet, when we abstracted four or five parts of Oil of Vitriol from one of Quick-silver, (especial∣ly if the operation were repeated,) and then washed off as much as we could of the saline particles of the Oil of Vitriol; yet those that remained adhering to the Mercury made it far more fixt, than either of the liquours had been before, and inabled it even in a Crucible to endure such a degree Page  30 of fire, before it could be driven a∣way, as, I confess, I somewhat won∣dered at. The like Turbith may be made with Oil of Sulphur per Campa∣nam. But this is nothing to what Helmont tells us of the operation of his Alkahest, where he affirms, that that Menstruum, which is volatile e∣nough, being abstracted from running Mercury, not onely coagulates it, but leaves it fixt, so that it will endure the brunt of fires acuated by Bellows, (omnem follium ignem.) If this be certain, it will not be a slender proof, that Fixity may be Mechanically pro∣duced; and however, the Argument will be good in reference to the Hel∣montian Spagyrists. For if, as one would expect, there do remain some particles of the Menstruum with those of the metal, it will not be de∣nied, that two volatile substances may perfectly fix one another. And if, as Helmont seems to think, the Menstruum be totally abstracted, this supposition will the more favour our Doctrine about Fixity; since, if Page  31 there be no material additament left with the Quick-silver, the Fixation cannot so reasonably be ascribed to any thing, as to some new Mechanical modification, and particularly to some change of Texture introduced into the Mercury it self.
And that you may think this the less improbable, I will now proceed to some Instances, whereof the first shall be this; That, having put a mix∣ture made of a certain proportion of two dry, as well as volatile, bodies, (viz. Sal Armoniac, and Flower or very fine powder of Sulphur,) to half its weight of common running Mer∣cury, and elevated this mixture three or four times from it, (in a conveni∣ently shaped, and not over-wide, glass) the Mercury, that lay in the bottom in the form of a ponderous and some∣what purplish powder, was, by this operation, so fixt, that it long endured a strong fire, which at length was made so strong, that it melted the Glass, and kept it melted, without being strong enough to force up the Page  32 Mercury: which, by some trials, not so proper to be here mentioned, seemed to have its salivating and e∣metick powers extraordinarily infrin∣ged, and sometimes quite suppressed. But this onely upon the bye. In all the other Instances, (wherewith I shall conclude these Notes,) I shall employ one Menstruum, Oil of Vi∣triol, and shew you the efficacy of it in fixing some parts of volatile bo∣dies with some parts of it self; by which examples it may appear, that a Volatile body may not onely lessen the volatility of another body, as in the lately mentioned case of our spi∣rituous Sal Armoniac; but that two Substances, that apart were volatile, may compose a third, that will not onely be less volatile, but considera∣bly (if not altogether) fixt.
We mixed then, by degrees, a∣bout equal parts of Oil of Vitriol and Oil of Turpentine: and though each of them single, especially the latter, will ascend with a moderate fire in a Sand-furnace; yet, after the Distil∣lation Page  33 was ended, we had a conside∣rable quantity, sometimes (if I mis∣remember not) a fifth or sixth part, of a Caput Mortuum black as a Coal, and whereof a great part was of a scarce to be expected fixtness in the fire.
To give a higher proof of the dis∣position, that Oil of Vitriol has to let some of its parts grow fixt by combination with those of an excee∣ding, volatile additament, I mixed this liquour with an equal or double weight of highly rectified Spirit of Wine, and not onely after, but some∣times without, previous digestion, I found, that the fluid parts of the mix∣ture being totally abstracted, there would remain a pretty quantity of a black Substance so fixt as to afford just cause of wonder.
And because Camphire is esteemed the most fugitive of consistent bo∣dies, in regard that, being but laid in the free air, without any help of the fire, it will fly all away; I tried, what Oil of Vitriol abstracted from Page  34Camphire would doe; and found at the bottom of the Retort a greater quantity than one would expect of a Substance as black as pitch, and al∣most as far from the volatility as from the colour of Camphire, though it appeared not, that any of the Gum had sublim'd into the neck of the Retort.
From all which Instances it seems manifestly enough to follow, that in many cases there needs nothing to make associated particles, whether volatile or not, become fixt, but ei∣ther to implicate or intangle them among themselves, or bring them to touch one another according to large portions of their surfaces, or by both these ways conjoyntly, or by some others, to procure the firm Cohae∣sion of so many particles, that the re∣sulting Corpuscles be too big or hea∣vy to be, by the degree of fire wherein they are said to be fixt, dri∣ven up into the Air.
FINIS.
Page  [unnumbered]Page  [unnumbered]Page  [unnumbered]
Experiments and Notes ABOUT THE MECHANICAL ORIGINE OR PRODUCTION OF CORROSIVENESS AND CORROSIBILITY. By the Honourable ROBERT BOYLE Esq; Fellow of the R. Society.
LONDON, Printed by E. Flesher, for R. Davis Bookseller in Oxford. 1675.
Page  [unnumbered]Page  1Experiments and Notes ABOUT THE MECHANICAL PRODUCTION OF CORROSIVENESS AND CORROSIBILITY.
SECT. I. About the Mechanical Origine of Cor∣rosiveness.
I Do not in the following Notes treat of Corrosiveness in their strict sense of the word, who ascribe this Quality only to Liquors, that are notably acid or sowre, such as Aqua fortis, Spirit of Salt; Vinegar▪ Page  2 Juice of Lemons, &c. but, that I may not be oblig'd to overlook Uri∣nous, Oleous, and divers other Sol∣vents, or to coin new names for their differing Solutive Powers, I pre∣sume to employ the word Corrosive∣ness in a greater latitude, so as to make it almost equivalent to the So∣lutive power of Liquors, referring other Menstruums to those that are Corrosive or fretting, (though not always as to the most proper, yet) as to the principal and best known species; which I the less scruple here to do, because I have* elsewhere more distinctly enumerated and sorted the Solvents of bodies.
The Attributes that seem the most proper to qualifie a Liquor to be Corrosive, are all of them Mechani∣cal, being such as are these that fol∣low:
First, That the Menstruum consist of, or abound with, Corpuscles not Page  3 too big to get in at the Pores or Commissures of the body to be dis∣solved; nor yet be so very minute as to pass through them, as the beams of Light do through Glass; or to be unable by reason of their great slenderness and flexibility to disjoyn the parts they invade.
Secondly, That these Corpuscles be of a shape fitting them to insinu∣ate themselves more or less into the Pores or Commissures above-menti∣oned, in order to the dissociating of the solid parts.
Thirdly, That they have a com∣petent degree of solidity to disjoyn the Particles of the body to be dis∣solved; which Solidity of Solvent corpuscles is somewhat distinct from their bulk, mention'd in the first Qualification; as may appear by comparing a stalk of Wheat and a metalline Wire of the same Diame∣ter, or a flexible wand of Osier of the bigness of ones little finger, with a rigid rod of Iron of the same length and thickness.
Page  4Fourthly, That the Corpuscles of the Menstruum be agile and advan∣taged for motion, (such as is fit to disjoyn the parts of the invaded bo∣dy) either by their shape, or their minuteness, or their fitness to have their action befriended by adjuvant Causes; such as may be (first) the pressure of the Atmosphere, which may impell them into the Pores of bodies not fill'd with a Substance so resisting as common Air: As we see, that water will by the prevalent pressure of the Ambient, whether Air or Water, be raised to the height of some inches in capillary Glasses, and in the pores of Spunges, whose consistent parts being of easier cessi∣on than the sides of Glass-pipes, those Pores will be enlarged, and consequently those sides disjoyn'd, as appears by the dilatation and swelling of the Spunge: And (se∣condly) the agitation, that the in∣truding Corpuscles may be fitted to receive in those Pores or Commis∣sures by the transcursion of some Page  5 subtile ethereal matter; or by the numerous knocks and other pulses of the swimming or tumbled Corpu∣scles of the Menstruum it self, (which being a fluid body, must have its small parts perpetually and vari∣ously moved) whereby the engaged Corpuscles, like so many little Wed∣ges and Leavers, may be enabled to wrench open, or force asunder the little parts between which they have insinuated themselves. But I shall not here prosecute this Theory, (which, to be handled fully, would require a discourse apart) since these Conjectures are propos'd but to make it probable in the general, That the Corrosiveness of bodies may be deduced from Mechanical Prin∣ciples: But whether best from the newly propos'd ones, or any other, need not be anxiously consider'd in these Notes, where the things main∣ly intended and rely'd on, are the Experiments and Phaenomena them∣selves.
Page  6
EXPER. I.
'TIs obvious, that, though the recently exprest Juice of Grapes be sweet, whilst it retains the Texture that belongs to it as 'tis new, (especially if it be made of some sorts of Grapes that grow in hot Regions,) yet after fermentati∣on, 'twill, in tract of time, as 'twere spontaneously, degenerate into Vine∣gar. In which Liquor, to a multi∣tude of the more solid Corpuscles of the Must, their frequent and mu∣tual Attritions may be supposed to have given edges like those of the blades of swords or knives; and in which, perhaps, the confused agita∣tion that preceded, extricated, or, as it were, unsheathed some ac•d par∣ticles, that (deriv'd from the sap of the Vine, or, perchance more origi∣nally, from the juice of the Earth) were at first in the Must, but lay conceal'd, and as it were sheathed, Page  7 among the other particles where∣with they were associated, when they were prest out of the Grapes. Now this Liquor, that by the fore∣mentioned (or other like) Mecha∣nical Changes is become Vinegar, does so abound with Corpuscles, which, on the account of their edges, or their otherwise sharp and pene∣trative shape, are Acid and Corro∣sive, that the better sort of it will, without any preparation, dissolve Coral, Crabs-eyes, and even some Stones, Lapis stellaris in particular, as also Minium, (or the Calx of Lead) and even crude Copper, as we have often tried. And not one∣ly the distill'd Spirit of it will do those things more powerfully, and perform some other things that meer Vinegar cannot; but the saline par∣ticles, wont to remain after Distil∣lation, may, by being distill'd and cohobated per se, or by being skil∣fully united with the foregoing Spi∣rit, be brought to a Menstruum of no small efficacy in the dissolution▪ Page  8 and other preparations of metalline bodies, too compact for the meer Spirit it self to work upon.
From divers other sweet things also may Vinegar be made; and even of Honey, skilfully fermented with a small proportion of common wa∣ter, may be made a Vinegar strong∣er than many of the common Wine∣vinegars; as has been affirmed to me by a very candid Physician, who had occasion to deal much in Liquors.
EXPER. II.
NOt onely several dry Woods, and other Bodies that most of them pass for insipid, but Honey and Sugar themselves afford by Di∣stillation Acid Spirits that will dis∣solve Coral, Pearls, &c. and will al∣so corrode some Metals and metal∣line Bodies themselves; as I have often found by Trial. So that the vio∣lent Operation of the fire, that de∣stroys Page  9 what they call the Form of the distill'd body, and works as a Mechanical Agent by agitating, breaking, dissipating, and under a new constitution reassembling the parts, procures for the Distiller an Acid Corrosive Menstruum; which whether it be brought to pass by making the Corpuscles rub one an∣other into the figure of little sharp blades, or by splitting some solid parts into sharp or cutting Corpu∣scles, or by unsheathing, as it were, some parts, that, during the former Texture of the body, did not ap∣pear to be acid; or whether it be rather effected by some other Me∣chanical way, may in due time be further considered.
Page  10
EXPER. III.
'TIs observ'd by Refiners, Gold∣smiths and Chymists, that Aqua Fortis and Aqua Regia, which are Corrosive Menstruums, dissolve Metals, the former of them Silver, and the latter Gold, much more speedily and copiously when an ex∣ternal heat gives their intestine mo∣tions a new degree of Vehemency or Velocity, which is but a mechani∣cal thing; and yet this superadded measure of Agitation is not onely in the abovemention'd Instances a powerfully assistant Cause in the So∣lutions made by the lately mention'd Corrosive Liquors, but is that with∣out which some Menstruums are not wont sensibly to corrode some bo∣dies at all, as we have tried in keep∣ing Quick-silver in three or four times its weight of Oyl of Vitriol; since in this Menstruum I found not the Mercury to be dissolved or cor∣roded, Page  11 though I kept it a long time in the Cold: Whereas, when the Oyl of Vitriol was excited by a convenient heat, (which was not faint) it corroded the Mercury into a fine white Calx or powder, which, by the affusion of fair water, would be presently turn'd into a yellowish Calx of the colour and nature of a Turbith. I remember also, that ha∣ving for trials sake dissolv'd in a weak Spirit of Salt, a fourth part of its weight of fine Crystals of Nitre, we found, that it would not in the cold (at least during a good while that we waited for its operation) dis∣solve Leaf-gold; but when the Men∣struum was a little heated at the fire, the Solution proceeded readily e∣nough. And in some cases, though the external heat be but small, yet there may intervene a brisk heat, and much cooperate in the dissolution of a Body; as, for instance, of Quick∣silver in Aqua Fortis. For it is no prodigy to find, that when a full proportion of that fluid Metal has Page  12 been taken, the Solution, though at first altogether liquid, and as to sense uniform, comes to have after a while a good quantity of coagula∣ted or crystalliz'd matter at the bot∣tom, of which the cause may be, that in the very act of Corrosion there is excited an intense degree of heat, which conferring a new de∣gree of agitation to the Menstruum, makes it dissolve a good deal more, than afterwards, when the Conflict is over, it is able to keep up.
EXPER. IV.
WE have observed also, that Agitation does in some ca∣ses so much promote the Dissolutive power of Saline bodies, that though they be not reduc'd to that subtilty of parts, to which a strong Distil∣lation brings them; yet they may in their grosser and cruder form have the power to work on Metals; as I elsewhere shew, that by barely boil∣ing Page  13 some Solutions of Salts of a convenient structure, as Nitre, Sal Armoniac, &c. with foliated Gold, Silver, &c. we have corroded these Metalas, and can dissolve some o∣thers. And by boiling crude Cop∣per (in Filings) with Sublimate and common water, we were able, in no long time, to make a Solution of the Metal.
EXPER. V.
SOmetimes also, so languid an Agi∣tation, as that which seems but sufficient to keep a Liquor in the state of fluidity, may suffice to give some dry bodies a corroding power, which they could not otherwise ex∣ercise; as in the way of writing ones name (or a Motto) upon the blade of a knife with common Sublimate: For, if having very thinly overlaid which side you please with Bees∣wax, you write with a bodkin or some pointed thing upon it; the Page  14 Wax being thereby removed from the strokes made by the sharp bo∣dy, 'tis easie to etch with Sublimate; since you need but strew the pow∣der of it upon the place bared of the Wax, and wet it well with meer common water; for strong Vinegar is not necessary. For after a while all the parts of the blade that should not be fretted, being protected by the Case or Film of Wax, the Sublimate will corrode onely where way has been made for it by the bodkin, and the Let∣ters will be more or less deeply in∣graven (or rather etch'd) accord∣ing to the time the Sublimate is suf∣fer'd to lye on. And if you aim onely at a legible impression, a few minutes of an hour (as four or five) may serve the turn.
Page  15
EXPER. VI.
THis brings into my mind an Observation I have sometimes had occasion to make, that I found more useful than common, and it is, That divers Bodies, whether di∣still'd or not distill'd, that are not thought capable of dissolving other Bodies, because in moderate degrees of heat they will not work on them, may yet by intense degrees of heat be brought to be fit Solvents for them. To which purpose I remem∣ber, that having a distill'd Liquor, which was rather sweet to the taste, than either acid, lixiviate or urinous, though for that reason it seem'd un∣fit to work on Pearls, and accord∣ingly did not dissolve them in a con∣siderable time, wherein they were kept with it in a more than ordina∣rily warm digestion; yet the Glass being for many hours (amounting perhaps to some days) kept in such Page  16 an heat of sand as made the Liquor boil, we had a Dissolution of Pearls, that uniting with the Menstruum made it a very valuable Liquor. And though the Solvents of crude Gold, wont to be employed by Chymists, are generally distill'd Li∣quors that are acid, and in the lately mention'd Solvent, made of crude Salts and common water, Acidity seem'd to be the predominant quali∣ty (which makes the use of Soluti∣ons made in Aqua Regia, &c. sus∣pected by many Physicians and Chy∣mists;) yet fitly chosen Alcalizate Bodies themselves, as repugnant as they use to be to Acids, without the help of any Liquor will be en∣abled by a melting Fire in no long time to penetrate and tear asunder the parts even of crude Gold; so that it may afterwards be easily ta∣ken up in Liquors that are not acid, or even by water it self.
Page  17
EXPER. VII.
THe Tract about Salt-peter, that gave occasion to these Anno∣tations, may furnish us with an emi∣nent Instance of the Production of Solvents. For, though pure Salt∣peter it self, when dissolv'd in water, is not observ'd to be a Menstruum for the Solution of the Metals here∣after to be named, or so much as of Coral it self; yet, when by a con∣venient Distillation its parts are split, if I may so speak, and by Attrition, or other Mechanical ways of work∣ing on them, reduc'd to the shapes of Acid and Alcalizate Salts, it then affords two sorts of Menstruums of very differing natures, which be∣twixt them dissolve or corrode a great number and variety of Bodies; as the Spirit of Nitre without addi∣tion is a Solvent for most Metals, as Silver, Mercury, Copper, Lead, &c. and also divers Mineral Bodies, as-Tin-glass, Page  18 Spelter, Lapis Calaminaris, &c. and the fixed Salt of Nitre ope∣rates upon Sulphureous Minerals, as common Sulphur, Antimony, and di∣vers other Bodies, of which I else∣where make mention.
EXPER. VIII.
BY the former Trials it has ap∣pear'd, that the increase of Mo∣tion in the more penetrating Corpu∣scles of a Liquor, contributes much to its Solutive power; and I shall now adde, that the Shape and Size, which are Mechanical affections, and sometimes also the Solidity of the same Corpuscles does eminently con∣cur to qualifie a Liquor to dissolve this or that particular body. Of this, even some of the more famili∣ar practices of Chymists may supply us with Instances. For there is no account so probable as may be given upon this supposition, why Aqua For∣tis▪ which will dissolve Silver, without Page  19 medling with Gold, should, by the addition of a fourth part of its weight of Sal Armoniac, be turn'd into A∣qua Regia, which, without medling with Silver, will dissolve Gold. But there is no necessity of having re∣course to so gross and compounded a Body as Sal Armoniac to enable Aqua Fortis to dissolve Gold: For, the Spirit of common Salt alone be∣ing mingled in a due proportion, will suffice for that purpose. Which (by the way) shews, that the Volatile Salt of Urine and Soot, that concur to the making up of Sal Armoniac, are not necessary to the dissolution of Gold, for which a Solvent may be made with Aqua Fortis and crude Sea-salt. I might adde, that the Mechanical affections of a Menstruum may have such an interest in its dis∣solutive power, that even Mineral or Metalline Corpuscles may become useful Ingredients of it, though per∣haps it be a distill'd Liquor; as might be illustrated by the Operations of some compounded Solvents, such as Page  20 is the Oyl of Antimony made by re∣peated Rectifications of what Chy∣mists call its Butter, which, whatever some say to the contrary, does much abound in Antimonial Sub∣stance.
EXPER. IX.
BUt I shall return to our Aqua Re∣gia, because the mention I had occasion to make of that Solvent brought into my mind what I de∣vis'd, to make it probable, that a smaller change, than one would lightly imagine, of the bulk, shape, or solidity of the Corpuscles of a Menstruum may make it fit to dis∣solve a Body it would not work on before. And this I the rather at∣tempted, because the warier sort of Chymists themselves are very shye of the inward use or preparations made of Gold by the help of Aqua Fortis, because of the odious stink they find, and the venenosity they Page  21 suspect in that corrosive Menstruum: Whereas Spirit of Salt we look up∣on as a much more innocent Liquor, whereof, if it be but diluted with fair water or any ordinary drink, a good Dose may be safely given in∣wardly, though it have not wrought upon Gold or any other body, to take off its acrimony. But, whether or no this prove of any great use in Physick, wherein perhaps, if any quantity of Gold be to be dissol∣ved, a greater proportion of Spirit of Nitre would be needed; the suc∣cess will not be unfit to be men∣tion'd in reference to what we were saying of Solvents. For, whereas we find not that our Spirit of Salt here in England will at all dissolve crude Gold, we found, that by put∣ting some Leaf-gold into a conveni∣ent quantity of good Spirit of Salt, when we had dropt-in Spirit of Ni∣tre (shaking the Glass at each drop,) till we perceived, that the mixture was just able in a moderate heat to dissolve the Gold, we found, that Page  22 we had been oblig'd to employ but after the rate of twelve drops of the latter Liquor to an ounce of the for∣mer; so that, supposing each of these drops to weigh a grain, the fortieth part of Spirit of Nitre being added, served to turn the Spirit of Salt into a kind of Aqua Regia. But to know the proportion otherwise than by ghess, we weigh'd six other drops of the same Spirit of Salt, and found them to amount not fully to three grains and an half: Whence it ap∣peared, that we added but about a seventieth part of the Nitrous Spirit to that of Salt.
The Experiments that have been hitherto recited, relate chiefly to the Production of Corrosive Menstru∣ums; and therefore I shall now adde an account of a couple of Trials, that I made manifestly to lessen or quite to destroy Corrosiveness in Liquors very conspicuous for that quality.
Page  23
EXPER. X.
WHereas one of the most cor∣rosive Menstruums, that is yet known, is Oyl of Vitriol, which will fret in pieces both divers Metals and Minerals, and a great number and variety of animal and vegetable bo∣dies; yet if you digest with it for a while onely an equal weight of high∣ly rectified Spirit of Wine, and after∣wards distill the mixture very wari∣ly, (for else the Experiment may ve∣ry easily miscarry,) you may obtain a pretty deal of Liquor not corrosive at all, and the remaining substance will be reduc'd partly into a Liquor, which, though acid, is not more so than one part of good Oyl of Vitri∣ol will make ten times as much com∣mon water, by being well mingled with it; and partly into a dry sub∣stance that has scarce any taste at all, much less a corrosive one.
Page  24
EXPER. XI.
ANd though good Aqua Fortis be the most generally employed of corrosive Menstruums, as being capable of dissolving or corroding, not onely many Minerals, as Tin-glass, Antimony, Zinke, &c. but all Metals except Gold, (for, though it make not a permanent Solution of crude Tin, it quickly frets the parts asunder, and reduces it to an immal∣leable substance;) yet to shew, how much the power of corroding may be taken away by changing the Me∣chanical Texture of a Menstruum, even without seeming to destroy the fretting Salts, I practis'd (and communicated to divers Virtuosi) the following Experiment, elsewhere mentioned to other purposes.
We took equal parts of good A∣qua Fortis, and highly dephlegm'd Spirit of Wine, and having min∣gled them warily and by degrees, Page  25 (without which caution the Opera∣tion may prove dangerous,) we u∣nited them by two or three Distilla∣tions of the whole mixture; which afterwards we found not to have the least fretting taste, and to be so de∣prived of its corrosive nature, that it would not work upon Silver, though by Precipitation or otherwise re∣duc'd to very small parts; nay, it would scarce sensibly work in a good while on Filings of Copper, or up∣on other bodies, which meer Vine∣gar, or perhaps Rhenish wine will corrode. Nay, I remember, that with another Spirit, (that was not Uri∣nous) and afterwards with Alkool of Wine we shew'd a more surpri∣zing Specimen of the power of ei∣ther destroying or debilitating the Corrosiveness of a Menstruum, and checking its Operation. For, ha∣ving caused a piece of Copper-plate to be put into one ounce of Aqua Fortis, when this Liquor was eager∣ly working upon the Metal, I caus'd an ounce of the Alkool of Wine, or Page  26 the other Spirit to be poured, (which it should warily be) upon the agitated mixture; whose effervescence, at the first instant, seemed to be much in∣creased, but presently after was checked, and the Corrosiveness of the Menstruum being speedily dis∣abled or corrected, the remaining Copper was left undissolved at the bottom.
Nor are these the onely acid Men∣struums that I have many years since been able to correct by such a way: For I applied it to others, as Spirit of Nitre, and even Aqua Regis it self; but it has not an equal opera∣tion upon all, and least of all (as far as I can remember) upon Spirit of Salt; as on the other side strong Spirit of Nitre was the Menstruum upon which its effects were the most satisfactory.
Most of the Chymists pretend, that the Solutions of bodies are per∣form'd by a certain Cognation and Sympathy between the Menstruum and the body it is to work upon. Page  27 And it is not to be denied, that in di∣vers Instances there is, as it were, a Consanguinity between the Men∣struum and the body to be dissolved; as when Sulphur is dissolved by Oyls whether exprest or distill'd: But yet, as the opinion is generally proposed, I cannot acquiesce in it, partly because there are divers So∣lutions and other Phaenomena, where it will not take place, and partly because even in those instances wherein 'tis thought most applicable, the effect seems to depend upon Me∣chanical Principles.
EXPER. XII.
ANd first, 'twill be difficult to shew, what Consanguinity there is between Sal Gem, and Antimony, and Iron, and Zinke, and Bread, and Camphire, and Lapis Calaminaris, and flesh of divers kinds, and Oister-shells, and Harts-horn, and Chalk, and Quick-lime; some of which be∣long Page  28 to the Vegetable, some to the Mineral, and some to the Animal Kingdom; and yet all of them and divers others (as I have tried) may, even without the assistance of exter∣nal Heat, be dissolved or corroded by one single Mineral Menstruum, Oyl of Vitriol. And which is not to be neglected on this occasion, some of them may be bodies, sup∣posed by Chymists to have an Anti∣pathy to each other in point of Cor∣rosion or Dissolution.
EXPER. XIII.
I Observe also, that a Dissolution may be made of the same body by Menstruums, to which the Chy∣mists attribute (as I just now ob∣served they did to some Bodies) a mutual Antipathy, and which there∣fore are not like to have a Sympathy with the same third body; as I found by trial, that both Aqua Fortis, and Spirit of Urine, upon whose mix∣ture Page  29 there insues a conflict with a great effervescence, will each of them apart readily dissolve crude Zinke, and so each of them will, the Filings of Copper. Not to mention, that pure Spirit of Wine and Oyl of Vitriol, as great a difference as there is between them, in I know not how many respects, and as notable a heat as will insue upon their Commix∣ture, will each of them dissolve Camphire; to which may be added other instances of the like nature. As for what is commonly said, that Oyls dissolve Sulphur, and Saline Menstruums Metals, because (as they speak) Simile simili gaudet: I answer, That where there is any such similitude, it may be very pro∣bably ascribed, not so much, with the Chymists that favour Aristotle, to the essential forms of the bodies that are to work on each other, nor, with the meer Chymists, to their Salt, or Sul∣phur, or Mercury, as such; but to the congruity between the pores and figures of the Menstruum, and Page  30 the body dissolved by it, and to some other Mechanical Affections of them.
EXPER. XIV.
FOr Silver, for example, not one∣ly will be dissolved by Nitre which they reckon a Salt, but be a∣malgam'd with, and consequently dissolved by, Quicksilver, and also by the operation of Brimstone, be easily incorporated with that Mine∣ral which Chymists are wont to ac∣count of so oleaginous a nature, and insoluble in Aqua Fortis.
EXPER. XV.
ANd as for those Dissolutions that are made with Oylie and inflammable Menstruums, of com∣mon Sulphur and other inflammable bodies, the Dissolution does not make for them so clearly as they Page  31 imagine. For if such Menstruums operate, as is alledged, upon the ac∣count of their being, as well as the bodies they work upon, of a sulphu∣reous nature, whence is it that high∣ly rectified Spirit of Wine, which according to them must be of a most Sulphureous nature, since being set on fire 'twill flame all away without leaving one drop behind it, will not (unless perhaps after a tedious while) dissolve even Flowers of Brimstone, which essential as well as express'd Oyls will easily take up; as Spirit of Wine it self also will do almost in a trice, if (as we shall see anon) by the help of an Alcali the Texture of the Brimstone be al∣ter'd, though the onely thing that is added to the Sulphur being an in∣combustible substance, is nothing near of so sulphureous a nature as the Flowers, and need have no Consan∣guinity upon the score of its Ori∣gine with Spirit of Wine, as 'tis alledged that Salt of Tartar has; since I have tried, That fixt Nitre, Page  32 employ'd instead of it, will do the same.
EXPER. XVI.
THe mention of Nitre brings in∣to my mind, that the Salt-pe∣ter being wont to be lookt upon by Chymists as a very inflammable bo∣dy, ought, according to them, to be of a very sulphureous nature; yet we find not that 'tis in Chymical Oyls, but in water, readily dissol∣ved. And whereas Chymists tell us, that the Solutions of Alcaly's, such as Salt of Tartar, or of Pot∣ashes in common Oyls, proceed from the great cognation between them, I demand, whence it happens, that Salt of Tartar will by boiling be dissolved in the exprest Oyl of Almonds, or of Olives, and be re∣duc'd with it to a soapy body, and that yet with the essential Oyl of Ju∣niper or Aniseeds, &c. where what they call the Sulphur is made pure Page  33 and penetrant, being freed from the earthy, aqueous and feculent parts, which Distillation discovers to be in the exprest Oyls, you may boil Salt of Tartar twenty times as long without making any Soap of them, or perhaps any sensible Solution of the Alkaly. And Chymists know, how difficult it is, and how unsuc∣cessfully 'tis wont to be attempted to dissolve pure Salt of Tartar in pure Spirit of Wine, by digesting the not peculiarly prepar'd Salt in the cognate Menstruum. I will not urge, that, though the most conspicuous mark of Sulphur be inflammability, and is in an eminent degree to be found in Oyl as well as Sulphur; yet an Alkaly and water which are neither singly, nor united inflam∣mable, will dissolve common Sul∣phur.
Page  34
EXPER. XVII.
BUt to make it probable against the Chymists, (for I propose it but as an argument ad hominem) that the Solution of Sulphur in ex∣prest Oyls depends upon somewhat else besides the abundance of the se∣cond Principle in both the bodies; I will adde to what I said before, an affirmation of divers Chymical Wri∣ters themselves, who reckon Aqua Regis, which is plainly a Saline Men∣struum, and dissolves Copper, Iron, Coral, &c. like Acid Liquors, a∣mong the Solvents of Sulphur, and by that power among other things distinguish it from Aqua Fortis. And on the other side if, there be a Con∣gruity betwixt an exprest Oyl and another body, though it be such as, by its easie Dissolubleness in Acid Salts, Chymists should pronounce to be of a saline nature, an exprest Oyl will readily enough work upon Page  35 it; as I have tried by digesting even crude Copper in Filings with Oyl of sweet Almonds, which took up so much of the metal as to be deeply coloured thereby, as if it had been a Corrosive Liquor: Nay, I shall adde, that even with Milk, as mild a Liquor as 'tis, I have found by Trial, that without the help of fire a kind of Dissolution may, though not in few hours, be made of crude Copper, as appear'd by the green∣ish blew colour the Filings acquired, when they had been well drenched in the Liquor, and left for a cer∣tain time in the Vessel, where the air had very free access to them.
Page  36
EXPER. XVIII.
BEsides the Argument ad hominem, newly drawn from Aqua Regia, it may be proper enough to urge an∣other of the same kind upon the ge∣nerality of the Helmontians and Pa∣racelsians, who admit what the Heads of their Sects deliver concerning the Operations of the Alkahest. For whereas 'tis affirm'd, that this irre∣sistible Menstruum will dissolve all tangible bodies here below, so as they may be reduc'd into insipid wa∣ter; as on the one side 'twill be very hard to conceive how a specificated Menstruum that is determin'd to be either Acid, or Lixiviate, or Uri∣nous, &c. should be able to dissolve so great a variety of Bodies of dif∣fering and perhaps contrary natures, in some whereof Acids, in other Lixiviate Salts, and in others Uri∣nous are predominant; so on the o∣ther side, if the Alkahest be not a Page  37 specificated Menstruum, 'twill very much disfavour the Opinion of the Chymists, that will have some Bo∣dies dissoluble onely by Acids as such, others by fixt Alkalys, and others again by Volatile Salts; since a Menstruum, that is neither Acid, Lixiviate, nor Urinous, is able to dissolve bodies, in some of which one, and in others another of those Principles is predominant: So that, if a Liquor be conveniently qualifi∣ed, it is not necessary that it should be either Acid to dissolve Pearl or Coral, or Alkalizate to dissolve Sul∣phur. But upon what Mechanical account an analyzing Menstruum may operate, is not necessary to be here determin'd. And I elsewhere offer some thoughts of mine about it.
Page  38
EXPER. XIX.
IF we duly reflect upon the known process that Chymists are wont to employ in making Mercurius dul∣cis, we shall find it very favourable to our Hypothesis. For though we have already shewn in the V. Expe∣riment, and 'tis generally confest, that common Sublimate made of Mercury is a highly corrosive body; yet, if it be well ground with near an equal weight of Quicksil∣ver, and be a few times sublimed, (to mix them the more exactly) it will become so mild, that 'twill not so much as taste sharp upon the tongue; so that Chymists are wont to call it Mercurius dulcis: And yet this Dulcification seems to be per∣formed in a Mechanical way. For most part of the Salts, that made the Sublimate so Corrosive, abide in the Mercurius dulcis; but by being compounded with more Quicksilver, Page  39 they are diluted by it, and (which is more considerable) acquire a new Texture, which renders them unfit to operate, as they did before, when the fretting Salts were not joyn'd with a sufficient quantity of the Mercury to inhibit their corro∣sive activity. It may perhaps some∣what help us to conceive, how this change may be made, if we ima∣gine, that a company of meer Knife-blades be first fitted with Hafts, which will in some regard lessen their wounding power by covering or casing them at that end which is design'd for the handle; (though their insertion into those Hafts, turn∣ing them into Knives, makes them otherwise the fitter to cut and pierce) and that each of them be afterwards sheathed, (which is, as it were, a hafting of the Blades too;) for then they become unfit to cut or stab, as before, though the Blades be not destroyed: Or else we may conceive these Blades without Hafts or Sheaths to be tied up in bundles, Page  40 or as it were in little faggots with pieces of wood, somewhat longer than themselves, opportunely pla∣ced between them. For neither in this new Constitution would they be fit to cut and stab as before. And by conceiving the edges of more or fewer of the Blades to be turn'd in∣wards, and those that are not, to have more or less of their points and edges to be sheath'd, or other∣wise cover'd by interpos'd bodies, one may be help'd to imagine, how the genuine effects of the Blades may be variously lessen'd or diversi∣fi'd. But, whether these or any other like changes of Disposition be fan∣cy'd, it may by Mechanical Illustra∣tions become intelligible, how the Corrosive Salts of common Subli∣mate may lose their efficacy, when they are united with a sufficient quantity of Quicksilver in Mercuri∣us dulcis: In which new state the Salts may indeed in a Chymical phrase be said to be satiated; but this Chymical phrase does not ex∣plicate Page  41 how this Saturation takes away the Corrosiveness from Salts that are still actually present in the sweet Mercury. And by Analogy to some such Explications as the a∣bove propos'd, a possible Account may be render'd, why fretting Salts do either quite lose their sharpness, as Alkalies, whilst they are imbodi∣ed with Sand in common Glass; or lose much of their Corrosive Acidi∣ty, as Oyl of Vitriol does when with Steel it composes Vitriolum Martis; or else are transmuted or disguis'd by conjunction with some corroded bodies of a peculiar Tex∣ture, as when Aqua Fortis does with Silver make an extreamly bitter Salt or Vitriol, and with Lead one that is positively sweet almost like common Saccharum Saturni.
Page  42
EXPER. XX.
TO shew, how much the Efficacy of a Menstruum may depend even upon such seemingly slight Me∣chanical Circumstances as one would not easily suspect any necessity of, I shall employ an Experiment, which though the unpractis'd may easily fail of making well, yet, when I tried it after the best manner, I did it with good success. I put then up∣on Lead a good quantity of well rectified Aqua Fortis, in which the Metal, as I expected, continued un∣dissolved; though, if the Chymists say truly that the dissolving power of the Menstruum consists onely in the acid Salts that it abounds with, it seems naturally to follow, that the more abundance of them there is in a determinate quantity of the Li∣quor, it should be the more power∣fully Page  43 able to dissolve Metalline and Mineral bodies. And in effect we see, that, if Corrosive Menstruums be not sufficiently dephlegmed▪ they will not work on divers of them. But, notwithstanding this plausible Doctrine of the Chy∣mists, conjecturing that the Saline Particles that swam in our Aqua Fortis might be more throng'd to∣gether, than was convenient for a body of such a Texture of Saline parts, and such intervals between them, I diluted the Menstruum by adding to it what I thought fit of fair water, and then found, that the desired Congruity betwixt the A∣gent and the Patient emerged, and the Liquor quickly began to fall upon the Metal and dissolve it. And if you would try an Experiment to the same purpose, that needs much less circumspection to make it suc∣ceed, you may, instead of employ∣ing Lead, reiterate what I elsewhere mention my self to have tried with Page  44 Silver, which would not dissolve in too strong Aqua fortis, but would be readily fallen upon by that Liquor, when I had weaken'd it with com∣mon water.
And this it may suffice to have said at present of the power or faculty that is found in some bodies of Cor∣roding or Dissolving others. Where∣of I have not found among the A∣ristotelians, I have met with, so much as an Offer at an Intelligible account. And I the less expect the vulgar Chymists will from their Hy∣postatical Principles afford us a Sa∣tisfactory one, when, besides the Par∣ticulars that from the nature of the things and Helmont's Writings have been lately alledg'd against their Hypothesis, I consider, how slight ac∣counts they are wont to give us even of the familiar Phaenomena of Corro∣sive Liquors. For if, for example, you ask a vulgar Chymist why Aqua fortis dissolves Silver and Copper, Page  45 'tis great odds but he will tell you, 'tis because of the abundance of fret∣ting Salt that is in it, and has a cog∣nation with the Salts of the Metal. And if you ask him, why Spirit of Salt dissolves Copper, he will tell you 'tis for the same reason; and yet, if you put Spirit of Salt, though very strong, to Aqua fortis, this Li∣quor will not dissolve Silver, be∣cause upon the mixture, the Liquors acquire a new Gonstitution as to the Saline Particles, by vertue of which the mixture will dissolve, instead of Silver, Gold. Whence we may ar∣gue against the Chymists, that the Inability of this compounded Liquor to work on Silver does not proceed from its being weaken'd by the Spi∣rit of Salt; as well because, accord∣ing to them, Gold is far the more compact metal of the two, and re∣quires a more potent Menstruum to work upon it, as because this same compounded Liquor will readily dis∣solve Copper. And to the same pur∣pose Page  46 with this Experiment I should alledge divers others, if I thought this the fittest place wherein I could propose them.
Page  47
SECT. II. About the Mechanicall Origine of CORRO∣SIBILITY.
COrrosibility being the quality that answers Corrosiveness, he that has taken notice of the Advertisement I formerly gave about my use of the Term Corrosiveness in these Notes,* may easily judge, in what sense I employ the name of the other Quality; which (whether you will stile it Opposite or Conjugate) for want of a better word, I call Corrosibi∣lity.
This Corrosibility of Bodies is as well as their Corrosiveness a Rela∣tive thing; as we see, that Gold, for instance▪ will not be dissolved Page  48 by Aqua fortis, but will by Aqua Regis; whereas Silver is not solu∣ble by the latter of these Menstru∣ums, but is by the former. And this relative Affection, on whose ac∣count a Body comes to be corrodi∣ble by a Menstruum, seems to consist chiefly in three things, which all of them depend upon Mechanical Prin∣ciples.
Of these Qualifications the first is, that the Body to be corroded be furnish'd with Pores of such a big∣ness and figure, that the Corpuscles of the Solvent may enter them, and yet not be much agitated in them without giving brisk knocks or shakes to the solid parts that make up the walls, if I may so call them, of the Pores. And 'tis for want of this condition, that Glass is penetra∣ted in a multitude of places, but not dissipated or dissolv'd by the incident beams of Light, which permeate its Pores without any considerable re∣sistance; and though the Pores and Commissures of a Body were less Page  49 minute, and capable of letting in some grosser Corpuscles, yet if these were, for want of solidity or rigid∣ness, too flexible, or were of a fi∣gure incongruous to that of the Pores they should enter, the Disso∣lution would not insue; as it hap∣pens when pure Spirit of Wine is in the cold put upon Salt of Tartar, or when Aqua fortis is put upon powder of Sulphur.
The second Qualification of a Cor∣rodible Body is, that its consistent Corpuscles be of such a Bulk and Solidity, as does not render them uncapable of being disjoyn'd by the action of the insinuating corpuscles of the Menstruum. Agreeable to this and the former Observation is the practice of Chymists, who of∣tentimes, when they would have a Body to be wrought on by a Men∣struum otherwise too weak for it in its crude estate, dispose it to receive the action of the Menstruum by pre∣viously opening it, (as they speak) that is, by enlarging the Pores, ma∣king Page  50 a comminution of the Corpu∣scles, or weakening their Cohesion. And we see, that divers Bodies are brought by fit preparations to be re∣soluble in Liquors that would not work on them before. Thus, as was lately noted, Lime-stone by Cal∣cination becomes (in part) disso∣luble in water; and some Metalline Calces will be so wrought on by Sol∣vents, as they would not be by the same Agents, if the preparation of the Metalline or other Body had not given them a new Disposition. Thus, though crude Tartar, especially in lumps, is very slowly and difficultly dissoluble in cold water, yet when 'tis burnt it may be presently dissol∣ved in that Liquor; and thus, though the Filings and the Calx of Silver will not be at all dissolv'd by common water or Spirit of Wine; yet if by the interposition of the Saline Particles of Aqua Fortis, the Lunar Corpuscles be so disjoyn'd, and suffer such a comminution as they do in Crystals of Lune, the Metal thus Page  51 prepared and brought with its Saline Additament into a new Texture will easily enough dissolve, not one∣ly in water, but, as I have tried, in well rectified Spirit of Wine. And the like Solubility I have found in the Crystals of Lead made with Spirit of Verdigrease, or good di∣still'd Vinegar, and in those of Cop∣per made with Aqua Fortis.
The last Disposition to Corrosibi∣lity consists in such a cohesion of the parts, whereof a Body is made up, as is not too strict to be superable by the action of the Menstruum. This Condition, though of kin to the former, is yet somewhat differ∣ing from it, since a body may con∣sist of parts either bulky or solid, which yet may touch one another in such small portions of their Sur∣faces, as to be much more easily dis∣sociable than the minute or less solid parts of another Body, whose con∣tact is more full and close, and so their Cohesion more strict.
Page  52 By what has been said it may seem probable, that, as I formerly intimated, the Corrosibility of Bo∣dies is but a Mechanical Relation, resulting from the Mechanical Af∣fections and Contexture of its parts, as they intercept Pores of such sizes and figures as make them congruous to those of the Corpuscles of the Menstruum, that are to pierce be∣tween them, and disjoyn them.
That the Quality, that disposes the body it affects to be dissolv'd by Corrosive and other Menstruums, does (as hath been declared) in ma∣ny cases depend upon the Mechanical Texture and Affections of the bo∣dy in reference to the Menstruum that is to work upon it, may be made very probable by what we are in due place to deliver concerning the Pores of Bodies and Figures of Corpuscles. But yet in compliance with the design of these Notes, and agreeably to my custom on other Subjects, I shall subjoyn a few Expe∣riments on this occasion also.
Page  53
EXPER. I.
IF we put highly rectified Spirit of Wine upon crude Sulphur, or even Flowers of Sulphur, the Li∣quor will lie quietly thereon, espe∣cially in the cold, for many hours and days without making any visi∣ble Solution of it; and if such ex∣actly dephlegmed Spirit were put on very dry Salt of Tartar, the Salt would lie in an undissolved powder at the bottom: and yet, if before any Liquor be employed, the Sul∣phur be gently melted, and then the Alkali of Tartar be by degrees put to it, and incorporated with it; as there will result a new Texture dis∣coverable to the eye by the new colour of the Composition, so there will emerge a disposition that was not before in either of the Ingredi∣ents, to be dissolved by Spirit of Wine; insomuch, that though the mixture be kept till it be quite cold, Page  54 or long after too, provided it be carefully secur'd from the access of the air, the Spirit of Wine being put to it, and shaken with it, will, if you have gone to work aright, ac∣quire a yellow Tincture in a minute of an hour; and perhaps in less than half a quarter of an hour a red one, being richly impregnated with sulphureous Particles discover∣able by the Smell, Taste, and divers Operations.
EXPER. II.
['TIs known to several Chy∣mists, that Spirit of Salt does not dissolve crude Mercury in the cold; and I remember, I kept them for a considerable time in no contemptible heat without finding any Solution following. But I sup∣pose, many of them will be gratified by an Experiment once mention'd to me by an Ingenious German Gen∣tleman, namely, That if Mercury Page  55 be precipitated per se, that is, re∣duc'd to a red powder without ad∣ditament, by the meer operation of the fire, the Texture will be so chang'd, that the above-mention'd Spirit will readily dissolve it; for I found it upon Trial to do so; nay, sometimes so readily, that I scarce re∣member that I ever saw any Menstru∣um so nimbly dissolve any Metalline body whatsoever.]
EXPER. III.
THe former Experiment is the more remarkable, because, that though Oyl of Vitriol will in a good heat corrode Quicksilver, (as we have already related in the first Section,) yet I remember I kept a Precipitate per se for divers hours in a considerable degree of Heat, with∣out finding it to be dissolved or cor∣roded by the Menstruum. And yet having, for trials sake, put another parcel of the same Mercurial pow∣der Page  56 into some Aqua fortis, or Spirit of Nitre, there insued a speedy Disso∣lution even in the cold.
And that this Disposition to be dissolved by Spirit of Salt, that Mercury acquires by being turned in∣to Precipitate per se, that is, by being calcin'd, is not meerly the effect of the operation of the fire upon it, but of some change of Texture pro∣duced by that Operation; may be probably argued from hence, that, whereas Spirit of Salt is a very pro∣per Menstruum, as I have often tri∣ed, for the dissolving of Iron or Steel; yet, when that Metal is re∣duced by the action of the fire (e∣specially if a kind of Vitrification, and an irroration with distill'd Vi∣negar have preceded) to Crocus Martis, though it be thereby brought to a very fine powder, yet I found not, that, as Spirit of Salt will readily and with heat and noise dissolve Filings of Mars, so it would have the same or any thing near such an Operation upon the Crocus:Page  57 but rather, after a good while, it would leave in the bottom of the Glass a considerable, if not the greatest, part of it scarce, if at all, sensibly alter'd. And the Menstru∣um seem'd rather to have extracted a Tincture, than made an ordinary Solution; since the colour of it was a high yellow or reddish, whereas Mars, dissolved in Spirit of Salt, af∣fords a green Solution. Whether by repeated Operations with fresh Menstruum further Dissolutions might in time be made, I had not oc∣casion to try, and it may suffice for our present purpose, that Mars by the operation of the fire did evi∣dently acquire, not, as Mercury had done, a manifest facility, but on the contrary, a great indisposition to be dissolved by Spirit of Salt.
To second this Experiment, we vary'd it, by employing, instead of Spirit of Salt, strong Oyl of Vitri∣ol, which being pour'd on a little Crocus Martis made per se, did not, as that Menstruum is wont to do up∣on Page  58 Filings of crude Mars, readily and manifestly fall upon the powder with froth and noise, but (on the con∣trary) rested for divers hours calm∣ly upon it, without so much as producing with it any sensible warmth.
EXPER. IV.
IT agrees very well with our Do∣ctrine about the dependance of the Corrosibility of Bodies upon their Texture, that from divers Bo∣dies, whilst they are in conjunction with others, there result masses, and those homogeneous as to sense, that are easily dissoluble in Liquors, in which a great part of the matter, if it were separated from the rest, would not be at all dissolved. Thus we see, that common Vitriol is ea∣sily dissolved in meer water; where∣as if it be skilfully calcin'd, it will yield sometimes near half its first weight of insipid Colcothar, which Page  59 not onely is not soluble in water, but which neither Aqua Fortis nor Aqua Regis, though sometimes they will colour themselves upon it, are able (as far as I have tried) to make Solutions of. We see like∣wise, that simple water will, being boil'd for a competent time with Harts-horn, dissolve it and make a Jelly of it: And yet, when we have taken Harts-horn throughly calcin'd to whiteness, not onely we found that common water was no longer a fit Solvent for it, but we observed, that when we put Oyl of Vitriol it self upon it, a good part of the white powder was even by that Corrosive Menstruum left undis∣solved.
Page  60
EXPER. V.
IN the Fifteenth of the foregoing Experiments I refer to a way of making the Flower or Powder of common Sulphur become easily disso∣luble, which otherwise 'tis far from being, in highly rectified Spirit of Wine. Wherefore I shall now adde, that 'tis quickly perform'd by gent∣ly melting the Sulphur, and incor∣porating with it by degrees an equal or a greater weight of finely pow∣der'd Salt of Tartar, or of fixt Ni∣tre. For if the mixture be put warm into a Mortar that is so too; and as soon as 'tis reduc'd to pow∣der, be put into a Glass, and well shaken with pure Spirit of Wine, it will, (as perhaps I may have else∣where observed,) in a few minutes acquire a yellow colour, which af∣terwards will grow deeper, and ma∣nifest it self by the smell and effects to be a real Solution of Sulphur; Page  61 and yet this Solubleness in Spirit of Wine seems procur'd by the change of Texture, resulting from the Commixtion of meer Salt of Tar∣tar, which Chymists know, to their trouble, to be it self a body almost as difficult as Sulphur to be dissol∣ved in phlegmless Spirit of Wine, unless the Constitution of it be first alter'd by some convenient addita∣ment. Which last words I adde, because, though Spirit of Verdigrease be a Menstruum that uses to come off in Distillation much more intire∣ly than other acid Menstruums from the bodies it has dissolved; yet it will serve well for an additament to open (as the Chymists speak) the body of the Salt of Tartar. For this purpose I employ Spirit of Ver∣digrease, not made first with Spirit of Vinegar, and then of Wine, after the long and laborious way prescri∣bed by Basilius and Zwelfer, but easi∣ly and expeditiously by a simple Di∣stillation of crude Verdigrease of the better sort. For when you have Page  62 with this Liquor (being, if there be need, once rectified) dissolv'd as much good Salt of Tartar, as 'twill take up in the cold, if you draw off the Menstruum ad siccitatem, the remaining dry Salt will be manifestly alter'd in Texture even to the eye, and will readily enough in high recti∣fied Spirit of Wine afford a Soluti∣on, which I have found consider∣able in order to divers uses that concern not our present Discourse.
EXPER. VI.
TO the Consideration of the Fol∣lowers of Helmont I shall recommend an Experiment of that famous Chymist's, which seems to sute exceeding well with the Do∣ctrine propos'd in this Section. For he tells us, that, if by a subtle Men∣struum to which he ascribes that power. Quicksilver be devested (or depriv'd) of its external Sulphur, as he terms it, all the rest of the fluid Page  63 Metal, which he wittily enough stiles, the Kernel of Mercury, will be no longer corrosible by it. So that upon this Supposition, though common Quicksilver be observ'd to be so obnoxious to Aqua Fortis, that the same quantity of that Liquor will dissolve more of it, than of any other Metal; yet, if by the de∣privation of some portion of it the latent Texture of the Metal be alter'd, though not (that I remember) the visible appearance of it; the Body that was before so easily dissolved by Aqua Fortis, ceases to be at all dissoluble by it.
EXPER. VII.
AS for those Chymists of differ∣ing Sects, that agree in giving credit to the strange things that are affirm'd of the Operations of the Alkahest, we may in favour of our Doctrine urge them with what is deliver'd by Helmont, where he as∣serts, Page  64 that all solid Bodies, as Stones, Minerals, and Metals themselves, by having this Liquor duly abstracted or distill'd off from them, may be changed into Salt, equiponderant to the respective bodies whereon the Menstruum was put. So that sup∣posing the Alkahest to be totally ab∣stracted, (as it seems very proba∣ble to be, since the weight of the body whence 'twas drawn off is not alter'd;) what other change than of Texture can be reasonably imagin'd to have been made in the transmu∣ted bodies? and yet divers of them, as Flints, Rubies, Saphyrs, Gold, Silver, &c. that were insoluble be∣fore, some of them in any known Menstruums, and others in any but Corrosive Liquors, come to be capa∣ble of being dissolv'd in common water.
Page  65
EXPER. VIII.
'TIs a remarkable Phaenomenon, that suits very well with our opinion about the interest of Me∣chanical Principles in the Corrosive Power of Menstruums, and the Cor∣rosibility of bodies, that we pro∣duc'd by the following Experiment: This we purposely made to shew, after how differing manners the same body may be dissolv'd by two Men∣struums, whose minute parts are ve∣ry differingly constituted and agita∣ted. For whereas 'tis known, that if we put large grains of Sea-salt in∣to common water, they will be dis∣solved therein calmly and silently without any appearance of conflict; If we put such grains of Salt into good Oyl of Vitriol, that Liquor will fall furiously upon them, and produce for a good while a hissing noise with fumes, and a great store of bubbles, as if a potent Menstru∣um Page  66 were corroding some stubborn metal or mineral. And this Expe∣riment I the rather mention, because it may be of use to us on divers other occasions. For else 'tis not the onely, though it be the remarkablest, that I made to the same purpose.
EXPER. IX.
FOr, whereas Aqua Fortis or Aqua Regis, being pour'd upon Filings of Copper, will work upon them with much noise and ebullition, I have tried, that good Spirit of Sal Ar∣moniac or Urine, being put upon the like Filings, and left there without stopping the Glass, will quickly be∣gin to work on them, and quietly dis∣solve them almost as water dis∣solves Sugar. To which may be added, that even with Oyl of Tur∣pentine I have, though but slowly, dissolved crude Copper; and the Experiment seemed to favour our Conjecture the more, because ha∣ving tried it several times, it ap∣pear'd, Page  67 that common unrectified Oyl would perform the Solution much quicker than that which was puri∣fied and subtiliz'd by rectification; which though more subtle and pe∣netrant, yet was, it seems, on that account less fit to dissolve the Metal, than the grosser Oyl whose particles might be more solid or more advan∣tageously shap'd, or on some other Mechanical account better qualified for the purpose.
EXPER. X.
TAke good Silver, and, having dissolv'd it in Aqua Fortis, pre∣cipitate it with a sufficient quantity of good Spirit of Salt; then having wash'd the Calx, which will be very white, with common water, and dri∣ed it well, melt it with a moderate fire into a fusible Mass, which will be very much of the nature of what Chymists call Cornu Lunae, and which they make by precipitating dissolv'd Page  68 Silver with a bare Solution of com∣mon Salt made in common water. And whereas both Spirit of Salt and Silver dissolv'd in Aqua Fortis will each of them apart readily dissolve in simple water, our Luna Cornea not onely will not do so, but is so indis∣pos'd to Dissolution, that I remem∣ber I have kept it in Digestion, some in Aqua fortis, and some in Aqua Re∣gia, and that for a good while, and in no very faint degree of heat, with∣out being able to dissolve it like a Metal, the Menstruums having in∣deed ting'd themselves upon it, but left the Composition undissolv'd at the bottom.
With this Instance (of which sort more might be afforded by Chymical Precipitations) I shall conclude what I design'd to offer at present about the Corrosibility of Bodies, as it may be consider'd in a more ge∣neral way. For as to the Disposi∣tion that Particular Bodies have of being dissolved in, or of re•isting, Determinate Liquors, it were much Page  69 easier for me to enlarge upon that Subject, than it was to provide the Instances above recited. And these are not so few, but that 'tis hop'd they may suffice to make it probable, that in the Relation betwixt a Sol∣vent and the Body it is to work up∣on, that which depends upon the Mechanical affections of one or both, is much to be consider'd, and has a great interest in the operations of one of the bodies upon the o∣ther.
FINIS.
Page  [unnumbered]Page  [unnumbered]
OF THE MECHANICAL CAUSES OF CHYMICAL PRECIPITATION. By the Honourable ROBERT BOYLE Esq; Fellow of the R. Society.
LONDON, Printed by E. Flesher, for R. Davis Bookseller in Oxford. 1675.
Page  [unnumbered]Page  [unnumbered]
Advertisement.
THough I shall not deny, that, in Grammatical strictness, Precipitation should be reckon∣ed among Chymical Operations, not Qualities, yet I did not much scruple to insert the following Discourse a∣mong the Notes about Particular Qua∣lities, because many, if not most, of the Phaenomena, mentioned in the en∣suing Essay, may be considered as de∣pending, some of them, upon a power, that certain bodies have to cause Pre∣cipitation, and some upon such a Dis∣position to be struck down by others, as may, if men please, be called Pre∣cipitability. And so these differing Affections may with (at least) tole∣rable Congruity be referred to those that we have elsewhere stiled Chy∣mical Qualities.
Page  [unnumbered] But though I hope, I may in these few Lines have said enough concerning the name given to these Attributes, yet per∣haps it will be found in time, that the things themselves may deserve a larger Discourse than my little leasure would allow them. For that is not a cause∣less Intimation of the Importance of the subject, wherewith I conclude the fol∣lowing Tract, since besides that many more Instances might have been parti∣cularly referred to the Heads treated of in the Insuing Essay, there are im∣proper kinds of Precipitation (besides those mentioned in the former part of the Discourse) to which one may not incongruously refer divers of the Phae∣nomena of Nature, as well in the greater as in the lesser world, whereof either no Causes at all, or but improper ones are wont to be given. And besides the simple Spirits and Salts usually em∣ployed by Chymists, there are many compounded and decompounded bodies not only factitious but natural, (and some such as one would scarce suspect) that may in congruous subjects produce Page  [unnumbered] such Precipitations, as I speak of. And the Phaenomena and Consequents of such operations may in divers cases prove conducive both to the Discovery of Phy∣sical Causes, and the Production of useful effects; though the particulari∣zing of such Phaenomena do rather belong to a History of Precipitations, than to such a Discourse as that which follows, wherein I proposed not so much to deliver the latent Mysteries, as to investigate the Mechanical Causes of Precipitation.
Page  [unnumbered]Page  1OF THE MECHANICAL CAUSES OF CHYMICAL PRECIPITATION.
CHAP. I.
BY Precipitation is here meant such an agitation or motion of a heterogeneous liquor, as in no long time makes the parts of it subside, and that usually in the form of a powder or other consistent bo∣dy.
Page  2 As, on many occasions, Chymists call the substance that is made to fall to the bottom of the liquor, the Pre∣cipitate; so for brevity sake we shall call the body that is put into the li∣quor to procure that subsiding, the Precipitant; as also that which is to be struck down, the Precipitable sub∣stance or matter, and the liquor where∣in it swims before the separation, the Menstruum or Solvent.
When a hasty fall of a heteroge∣neous body is procured by a Precipi∣tant, the Operation is called Precipi∣tation in the proper or strict sense: But when the separation is made without any such addition, or the sub∣stance, separated from the fluid part of the liquor, instead of subsiding emerges, then the word is used in a more comprehensive, but less proper, acceptation.
As for the Causes of Precipitation the very name it self in its Chymical sense having been scarce heard of in the Peripatetic Schools, it is not to be expected, that they should have given Page  3 an account of the Reasons of the thing. And 'tis like, that those few Aristotelians, that have, by their converse with the laborato∣ries or writings of Chymists, taken notice of this Operation, would, ac∣cording to their custom on such occa∣sions, have recourse for the explica∣tion of it to some secret sympathy or antipathy between the bodies whose action and reaction intervenes in this Operation.
But if this be the way proposed, of accounting for it, I shall quickly have occasion to say somewhat to it in con∣sidering the ways proposed by the Chymists, who were wont to refer Precipitation, either, as is most usual, to a sympathy betwixt the Precipita∣ting body and the Menstruum which makes the Solvent run to the embra∣ces of the Precipitant, and so let fall the particles of the body sustained before; or (with others) to a great an∣tipathy or contrariety between the acid salt of the Menstruum and the fixed salt of the Oil, or solution of Page  4 calcined Tartar, which is the most general and usual Precipitant they im∣ploy.
But I see not, how either of these causes will either reach to all the Phae∣nomena that have been exhibited, or give a true account even of some of those, to which it seems applicable. For first, in Precipitations, wherein what they call a sympathy between the liquors, is supposed to produce the effect, this admired sympathy does not (in my apprehension) evince such a mysterious occult Quality as is presumed, but rather consists in a greater congruity as to bigness, shape, motion and pores of the minute parts between the Menstruum and the Preci∣pitant, than between the same Solvent and the body it kept before dissolv∣ed. And though this sympathy rightly explained may be allowed to have an interest in some such Preci∣pitations as let fall the dissolved bo∣dy in its pristine nature and form, and only reduced into minute pow∣der; yet I find not, that in the gene∣rality Page  5 of Precipitations this Doctrine will hold; For in some that we have made of Gold and Silver in proper Menstruums, after the subsiding mat∣ter had been well washed and dried, several Precipitates of Gold made, some with oil of Tartar, which a∣bounds with a fixed salt, and is the usual Precipitant, and some with an Urinous Spirit, which works by Ver∣tue of a salt highly fugitive or Vo∣latile, I found the powder to exceed the weight of the Gold and Silver I had put to dissolve; and the Eye it self sufficiently discovers such Preci∣pitates not to be meer metalline pow∣ders, but Compositions, whose con∣sisting, not (as hath been by some bo∣dy suspected) of the combined Salts alone, but of the metalline parts also, may be strongly concluded not only from the ponderousness of di∣vers of them in reference to their bulk, but also manifestly from the re∣duction of true malleable metals from several of them.
Page  6
CHAP. II.
THE other Chymical way of ex∣plicating Precipitations may, in a right sence, be made use of by a Naturalist on some particular occasi∣ons. But I think it much too narrow and defective, as 'tis in a general way proposed, to be fit to be acquiesced in. For first 'tis plain, that 'tis not only Salt of Tartar and other fixed Alcalies that precipitate most bodies that are dissolved in acid Menstru∣ums; as in making of Aurum fulminans, oil of Tartar precipitates the Gold out of Aqua Regis: But acid liquors themselves do on many occa∣sions no less powerfully precipitate metals and other bodies out of one another. Thus spirit of Salt, (as I have often tried) precipitates Silver out of Aqua fortis: The corrosive Spirit of Nitre copiously precipitates that white powder whereof they make Bezoardicum Minerale: Spirit or Page  7 oil of Sulphur made by a glass-bell precipitates Corals, Pearls, &c. dis∣solved in Spirit of Vinegar, as is known to many Chymists, who now use this Oleum Sulphuris per Campa∣nam, to make the Magistery of Pearls, &c. for which vulgar Chy∣mists imploy Oleum Tartari per deli∣quium.
I have sometimes made a Menstru∣um, wherein though there were both Acid and Alcalizate Salts; yet I did not find, that either acid Spirits or oil of Tartar, or even Spirit of Urine would precipitate the dissolved substan∣ces.
And I have observed, both that Salts of a contrary nature will precipitate bodies out of the same Menstruum, as not only Salt of Tartar, but Sea-salt being dissolved, will precipitate each other, and each of them apart will precipitate Silver out of Aqua fortis; and that even, where there is a confessed contrariety betwixt two liquors, it may be so ordered, that nei∣ther of them shall precipitate what Page  8 is dissolved by the other; of which I shall have occasion to give ere long a remarkable instance.
But it will best appear, that the abovementioned Theories of the Peripateticks and Chymists are at least insufficient to solve the Phaeno∣mena (many of which were probably not known to most of them, and per∣haps not weigh'd by any,) if we pro∣ceed to observe the Mechanical ways, by which Precipitations may be ac∣counted for; whereof I shall at pre∣sent propose some Number, and say somewhat of each of them apart; not that I think all of them to be equally important and comprehen∣sive, or that I absolutely deny, that any one of them may be reduced to some of the other; but that I think, it may better elucidate the subject, to treat of them severally, when I shall have premised, that I would not thence infer, that though, for the most part, Nature does principally effect Precipitations by one or other of these ways, yet in divers cases she Page  9 may not imploy two or more of them about performing the operation.
To precipitate the Corpuscles of a metal out of a Menstruum, wherein being once throughly dissolved it would of it self continue in that state, the two general ways that the na∣ture of the thing seems to suggest to him that considers it, are, either to add to the weight or bulk of the dis∣solved Corpuscles, and thereby ren∣der them unfit to accompany the particles of the Menstruum in their motions; or to weaken the sustaining power of the Menstruum, and there∣by disable it to keep the metalline particles swimming any longer: which falling of the deserted parts of the metal or other bodie, does often∣times the more easily insue, because in many cases, when the sustaining parti∣cles of the Menstruum come to be too much weakned, that proves an occasion to the metalline Corpuscles, disturbed in the former motion that kept them separate, to make occur∣sions and coalitions among them∣selves, Page  10 and their fall becomes the effect, though not equally so, of both ways of Precipitation; as on the other side, there are several occasi∣ons on which the same Precipitant, that brings the swimming particles of the metal to stick to one another, does likewise, by mortifying or disabling the saline Spirits or other parts of the solvent, weaken the sustaining power of that liquor.
CHAP. III.
TO descend now to the distinct Considerations about these two ways: The first of the most genera Causes of Precipitation is such a Co∣haesion procured by the Precipitant in the solution, as makes the com∣pounded corpuscles, or at least the associated particles of the dissolved body, too heavy to be sustained, or too bulky to be kept in a state of fluidity by the liquor.
Page  11 That in many Precipitations there is made a coalition betwixt the small parts of the Precipitant and those of the dissolved metal, or other body, and frequently also with the saline spirits of the Menstruum, may be ea∣sily shewn by the weight of the Pre∣cipitate, which though carefully washed and dryed, often surpasses, and sometimes very considerably, that of your crude metal that was dis∣solved; of which we lately gave an instance in Aurum fulminans and pre∣cipitated Silver; & we may yet give a more conspicuous one, in that which Chymists call Luna Cornea: For, if having dissolved Silver in good Aqua fortis, you Precipitate it with the solution of Sea-salt in fair water, and from the very white Precipitate wash the loose adhering salts, the remaining powder, being dryed and slowly melted, will look much less like a metalline body than like a piece of horn, whence also it takes its name; so considerable is Page  12 the additament of the saline to the metalline particles.
And that part of such additaments is, retained, may not only be found by weighing, but in divers cases may be argued from what is obvious to the Eye: as if you dissolve Mer∣cury in Aqua fortis, and into the phil∣trated solution drop spirit of Salt, or salt-water, or an urinous spirit, as of Sal Armoniac, you will have a very white Precipitate; but if instead of any of these, you drop-in deliquated salt of Tartar, your Precipitate will be of a brick or orange colour. From which experiment and some o∣thers I would gladly take a rise to perswade Chymists and Physitians, that 'tis not so indifferent, as those seem to think who look on Precipi∣tation but as a kind of Comminution, by what means the precipitation is performed. For by reason of the strict adhesion of divers saline par∣ticles of the precipitant and the sol∣vent, the precipitated body, not∣withstanding all the wonted abluti∣ons, Page  13 may have its qualities much di∣versified by those of the particles of the liquors, when these are fitted to stick very fast to it. Which last words I add, because, though that sometimes happens, yet it does not always, there being a geater differ∣ence than every body takes notice of between Precipitations; as you will be induced to think, if you pre∣cipitate the solution of Silver with Copper, with spirit of Sal Armoniac, with salt water, with oil of Tartar▪ with quick-silver, with crude Tartar and with Zink. And in the lately proposed Example, you will think it probable, that 'tis not all one, whe∣ther to dissolved Mercury or Silver, you imploy the subtile distilled Spi∣rits of Salt, or the gross body, whe∣ther in a dry form, or barely dissol∣ved in common water. And thus much of the Conduciveness of weight to the striking down the Corpuscles of a dissolved Body.
That also the Bulk of a body may very much contribute to make it Page  14 sink or swim in a liquor, appears by obvious instances. Thus Salt or Sugar, being put into water either in lumps or even in powder that is but gross, falls at first to the bottom, and lies there, notwithstanding the Air that may be intercepted between its parts or externally adhere to it. But when by the insinuating action of the water it is dissolved into minute particles, these are carried up and down with those of the liquor and subside not. The like happens, when a piece of silver is cast into Aqua for∣tis, and in many other cases.
On the other side I have several times observed, that some bodies that had long swam in a Menstruum, whilst their minute parts were kept from convening in it, did after∣wards by the coalition of many of those particles into bodies of a visi∣ble bulk coagulate and subside, (though sometimes, to hinder the evaporation of the Menstruum, the vessels were kept stopt.) Of this I elsewhere mention divers examples; Page  15 and particularly in urinous and ani∣mal spirits, well dephlegm'd, I have found, that after all had for a consi∣derable time continued in the form of a perfect liquor, and as to sense homogeneous, store of solid cor∣puscles, convening together, setled at the bottom of the glasses in the form of saline Crystals. Having also long kept a very red solution of Sulphur first unlock'd, (as they speak) made with highly rectified spirit of urine, I observed, that at length the Sulphureous particles, making little concretions between themselves, totally subsided and left the liquor almost devoid of tincture. By which you may see, that 'twas not impertinent to mention (as I lately did) among the subordinate causes of Precipitation, the associating of the particles of a dissolved body with one another. Of which I else∣where give a notable Example in the shining powder that I obtained from Gold dissolved in a peculiar Menstruum, without any Precipi∣tant, Page  16 by the coalition of the metalline particles, to which a tract of time gave opportunity to meet and adhere in a convenient manner.
If in what the Chymists call Pre∣cipitate per se, the Mercury be indeed brought to lose its fluidity, and be∣come a powder without being com∣pounded with any additional body, (which doubt I elsewhere state and discourse of) it will afford us a no∣table instance to prove, that the co∣alitions of particles into clusters of the self same matter will render them unfit for the motion requisite to fluidity. For in this odd precipi∣tation by fire, wherein the same Menstruum is both the Liquor and the Precipitate, being not all made at once, the Corpuscles that first dis∣close themselves by their redness, are rejected by those of the Mercury that yet remains fluid, as unable to accompany them in the motions that belong to Mercury as such.
Page  17
CHAP. IV.
BEfore I dismiss that way of Preci∣pitating, that depends upon the unwieldiness which the Precipitant gives to the body it is to strike down, it may not be impertinent, especially in reference to the foregoing part of this Paper, to consider, that perhaps in divers cases the Corpuscles of a dis∣solved body may be made unfit to be any longer sustained in the Menstru∣um, though the Precipitant adds very little to their bulk, or at least much more to their specific weight than to it. For I have elsewere shewn, that in divers solutions made of bodys by acid Menstruums, there are either ge∣nerated or extricated many small Aerial particles; and it will be easily granted, that these may be small e∣nough to be detained in the pores of the liquor and be invisible there, if we consider, what a multitude of aerial and formerly imperceptible bubbles Page  18 is afforded by common water in our Pneumatical Receivers, when the incumbent air that before pressed the liquor, is pumpt out. And if the Corpuscles of the dissolved body have any little Cavities or pores fit to lodge Aerial particles, or have asperous surfaces, between whose prominent parts the generated air may conve∣niently lie; in such cases, I say, these Invisible bubbles may be lookt upon, as making with the solid Corpuscles they adhered to, little aggregates much lighter in specie than the Cor∣puscles themselves would be; and consequently if the Precipitant con∣sist of particles of such a size and shape as are fit to expel these little bubbles, and lodge themselves in the cavities possessed by them before, there will be produced new aggre∣gates composed of the Corpuscles of the dissolved body and the particles of the Precipitant; which aggregates though they do take up very little or perhaps not at all more room (take∣ing that word in a popular sense) than Page  19 those, whereof the Aerial bubbles made a part, will yet be Specifically heavier than the former Aggregates were, and may thereby overcome the sustaining power of the Men∣struum.
One thing more may be fit to be taken notice of before we pass on further, namely, that 'tis upon the score of the Specific gravity of a bo∣dy, and not barely upon the action of the Precipitant, that an aggregate or a Convention of particles does ra∣ther fall to the bottom than rise to the top. For, though the A∣gents that procured the Coalition, make the cluster of particles become of a bulk too unwieldy to continue in the liquor as parts of it; yet if each of them be lighter in specie than an equal bulk of the Menstruum, or if they so convene as to intercept a sufficient number of little bubbles or aerial Corpuscles between them, and so become lighter than as much of the Menstruum as they take up the room of, they will not be precipitated Page  20 but emerge; as may be seen in the Pre∣paration of those Magisteries of Ve∣getables, I elswhere mention; where some deeply colour'd plants being made to tinge plentifully the Lixivi∣um they are boyled in, are afterwards by the addition of Alum made to curdle, as it were, into coloured Con∣cretions, which being (totally or in part) too big to swim as they did be∣fore they conven'd, and too light in comparison of the Menstruum to sub∣side, emerge to the top and float there. An easier and neater Example to the same purpose I remember I shewed by dissolving Camphire in highly recti∣fied spirit of Wine, 'till the solution was very strong. For though the Camphire, when put in Lumps into the spirit, sunk to the bottom of it; yet, when good store of water, (a liquor somewhat heavier in Specie than Camphire,) was poured upon the solution, the Camphire quickly concreted and returned to its own nature, and within a while emerged to the top of the mingled liquors and Page  21 floated there. These particulars I was willing to mention here, that I might give an instance or two of those pre∣cipitations, that I formerly spake of as improperly so called. And here I must not decline taking notice of a Phaenomenon, that sometimes occurs in Precipitations, and at first sight may seem contrary to our Doctrine about them. For now and then it happens, that after some drops of the Precipitant have begun a Precipita∣tion at the top or bottom of the Sol∣vent, one shakes the vessel, that the Precipitant may be the sooner diffu∣sed through the other liquor, but then they are quickly surprized to find, that instead of hastning the com∣pleat Precipitation, the matter al∣ready precipitated disappears, and the solvent returns to be clear, or, as to sense, as uniform, as it was before the Precipitant was put into it. B•u this Phaenomenon does not at all cross our Theory. For, when this hap∣pens, though that part of the Solvent, to which the Precipitant reaches, is Page  22 disabled for Reasons mentioned in this Discourse to support the dissol∣ved body, yet this quantity of the Precipitant is but small in proportion to the whole bulk of the solvent. And therefore, when the agitation of the vessel disperses the clusters of loosly concreted particles through the whole liquor, (which is seldom so exactly proportioned to the body it was to work on, as to be but just strong enough to dissolve it) that greater part of the Liquor, to which before the shaking of the vessel the Precipitant did not reach, may well be lookt upon as a fresh Menstruum, which is able to mortifie or overpow∣er the small quantity of the Precipi∣tant that is mingled with it, and so to destroy its late operation on the body dissolved, by which means the soluti∣on returns, as to sense, to its former state. Which may be illustrated by a not unpleasant Experiment, I re∣member I have long since made by precipitating a brick-coloured pow∣der out of a strong solution of Subli∣mate Page  23 made in fair water. For this sub∣siding matter, being laid to dry in the Philter, by which 'twas separated from the water, would retain a deep but somewhat dirty colour; and if then, putting it into the bottom of a wine glass, I poured upon it, either clear oil of Vitriol, or some other strong acid Menstruum, the Alcali∣zat particles being disabled and swal∣lowed up by some of the acid ones of the Menstruum, the other acid ones would so readily dissolve the residue of the powder, that in a trice the co∣lour of it would disappear and the whole mixture be reduced into a clear Liquor, without any sediment at the bottom.
Thus much may suffice at present about the first general way of Preci∣pitating Bodies out of the Liquors they swam in.
Page  24
CHAP. V.
THE other of the two princi∣pal ways, by which Precipita∣tions may be effected, is the disabling of the Solvent to sustain the dissolved body.
There may be many instances, wherein this second way of effecting Precipitations may be associated by Nature with the first way formerly proposed; but notwithstanding the cases, wherein Nature may (as I for∣merly noted) imploy both the ways therein, yet in most cases they suffici∣ently differ, in regard that in the former way the subsiding of the dis∣solved body is chiefly, if not only, caused by the additional weight as well as action of the external Preci∣pitant; whereas in most of the in∣stances of the later way, the effect is produced either without salt of Tar∣tar, or any such Precipitant, or by some other quality of the Precipi∣tant Page  25more than by its weight, or at least besides the weight it adds: Though I forget not, that I lately gave an example of a shining pow∣der of Gold, that fell to the bottom of a Menstruum without the help of an External Precipitant: But that was done so slowly, that it may be dis∣puted, whether it were a true Preci∣pitation; and I alledged it not as such, but to shew, that the increased bulk of Particles may make them un∣fit to swim in Menstruums, wherein they swam whilst they were more minute. And the like answer may be accommodated to the Precipitate per se newly mentioned.
This premised, I proceed now to observe, that the general way, I last proposed, contains in it several sub∣ordinate wayes, that are more parti∣cular; of which I shall now menti∣on the chief that occur to me, and though but briefly, illustrate each of them by examples. And first a Pre∣cipitation may be made, if the saline or other dissolving particles of the Page  26 Menstruum are mortified or rendred unfit for their former function, by particles of a Precipitant that are of a contrary nature.
Thus Gold and some other mine∣rals, being dissolved in Aqua Regis, will be precipitated with spirit of urine and other such liquors aboun∣ding with volatile and salino-sulphu∣reous Corpuscles, upon whose ac∣count it is that they act; whence these salts themselves, though cast into a Menstruum in a dry form, will serve to make the like Precipitations. And I the rather on this occasion mention Urinous spirits than Salt of Tartar, because those volatile par∣ticles add much less of weight to the little Concretions, which compose the Precipitated powder.
Upon instances of this kind, many of the modern Chymists have built that Antipathy betwixt the Salts of the solvent and those of the Menstru∣um, to which they ascribe almost all Precipitations. But against this I have represented something already, Page  27 and shall partly now, and partly in the sequel of this discourse add some farther reasons of my not being satis∣fied with this Doctrine. For, be∣sides that 'tis insufficient to reach ma∣ny of the Phaenomena of Precipitati∣ons, (as will ere long be shown,) and besides that 'tis not easie to make out, that there is any real antipathy be∣twixt inanimate bodies; I consider, 1. That some of those Menstruums, to which this Antipathy is attribu∣ted, do after a short commotion (whereby they are disposed to make convenient occursions and coaliti∣ons) amicably unite into concretions participating of both the Ingredi∣ents; as I have somewhere shewn by an Example purposely devis'd to make this out; to do which I drop∣ped a clear solution of fixed Nitre, instead of the usual one of common salt, upon a solution of silver, in A∣qua-fortis: For the saline particles of the Solvent and those of the Preci∣pitant, will, as I have elsewhere reci∣recited, Page  28 for the most part friendly unite into such Crystals of Nitre for the main, as they were obtained from: And though this notion of the Chymists, if well explained, be ap∣plicable to far more instances than the proposers of it seemed to have thought on, and may be made good use of in Practice; yet I take it to be such as is not true Universally, and, where it is true, ought to be ex∣plicated according to Mechanical Principles. For, if the particles of the Menstruum and those of the Precipitant be so framed, that upon the action of the one upon the other, there will be produced Corpuscles too big and unwieldy to continue in the state of fludity, there will insue a Precipitation: But if the constituti∣on of the corpuscles of the Precipi∣tating and of the Dissolved body be such, that the Precipitant also it self is fit to be a Menstruum to dissolve that body in; then, though there be an union of the Salts of the Precipi∣tant Page  29 and the metal (or other Solu∣tum) and perhaps of the solvent too, yet a Precipitation will not necessa∣rily follow, though the saline par∣ticles of the two liquors seemed, by the heat and ebullition excited be∣tween them upon their meeting, to exercise a great and mutual antipa∣thy. To satisfie some Ingenious men about this particular, I dissolved Zink or Speltar in a certain urinous spirit; (for, there are more than one that may serve the turn;) and then put to it a convenient quantity of a proper acid spirit; but though there would be a manifest conflict thereby occasioned betwixt the two liquors; yet the speltar remained dissolved in the mixture. And I remember, that for the same purpose I devised another Experiment, which is somewhat more easie and more clear. I dissolved Copper calcined per se, or even crude, in strong spirit of salt; (for unless it be such, it will not be so proper,) and having put to it by degrees a Page  30 good quantity of spirit of Sal-Armo∣niac or fermented Urine, though there would be a great commotion with hissing and bubbles produced, the Copper would not be precipita∣ted, because this Urinous spirit will as well as the Salt, (and much more readily) dissolve the same metal, and it would be kept dissolved notwith∣standing their operation on one ano∣ther; the intervening of which, and their action upon the metalline cor∣puscles, may be gathered from hence, that the green solution, made with spirit of salt alone, will by the super∣vening urinous spirits be changed either into a blewish green, or, if the proportion of this spirit be very great, into a rich blew almost like ultramarine. And from these two Experiments we may probably argue, that when the Precipitation of a metal &c. insues, it is not barely or the account of the supposed Antipa∣thy betwixt the Salts, but because the causes of that seeming Antipathy Page  31 do likewise upon a Mechanical ac∣count dispose the Corpuscles of the confounded liquors so to cohere, as to be too unwieldy for the fluid part.
CHAP. VI.
ANother way, whereby the dis∣solving particles of a Menstru∣um may be rendred unfit to sustain the dissolved body, is to present them another that they can more easily work on.
A notable Experiment of this you have in the common practice of Re∣finers, who, to recover the Silver out of Lace and other such mixtures wherein it abounds, use to dissolve it in Aqua fortis, and then in the solu∣tion leave Copper plates for a whole night (or many hours.) But if you have a mind to see the Experiment without waiting so long, you may Page  32 imploy the way, whereby I have of∣ten quickly dispatched it. As soon then as I have dissolved a convenient quantity, which needs not be a great one, of Silver in cleansed Aqua fortis, I add twenty or twenty five times as much of either distilled water or rain water; (for though common water will sometimes do well, yet it sel∣dome does so well;) and then into the clear solution I hang by a string a clean piece of Copper, which will be presently covered with little shining plates almost like scales of fish, which one may easily shake off and make room for more. And this may illu∣strate what we formerly mentioned about the subsiding of metalline cor∣puscles, when they convene in liquors, wherein, whilst they were dispersed in very minute parts, they swam freely. For in this operation the little scales of Silver seemed to be purely metalline, and there is no sa∣line Precipitant, as Salt of Tartar or of Urine, imployed to make them Page  33 subside. Upon the same ground, Gold and Silver dissolved in their proper Menstruums may be precipitated with running Mercury; and if a So∣lution of blew Vitriol (such as the Roman, East-Indian, or other of the like colours) be made in water, a clean plate of Steel or Iron being im∣mersed in it, will presently be over∣laid with a very thin case of Copper-which after a while will grow thick, er; but does not adhere to the iron so loosely as to be shaken off, as the Precipitated silver newly mentio∣ned may be from the Copper-plates whereto it adheres. And that in these operations the saline particles may really quit the dissolved body, and work upon the Precipitant, may appear by the lately mentioned practice of Refiners, where the Aqua-fortis, that forsakes the particles of the silver, falls a working upon the copper-plates imployed about the Precipitation, and dissolves so much of them as to acquire the greenish Page  34 blew colour of a good solution of that metal. And the Copper we can easily again without salts obtain by Precipitation out of that liquor with iron, and that too, remaining dissolved in its place, we can preci∣pitate with the tastless powder of another Mineral.
Besides these two ways of weak∣ning the Menstruum, namely, by mortifying its saline particles or se∣ducing them to work on other bo∣dies, and to forsake those they first dissolved, there are some other ways of weakning the Menstruum.
A Third way of effecting this, is by lessening or disturbing the agitati∣on of the solvent. And indeed since we find by experience, that some liquors when they are heated, will either dissolve some bodies they would not dissolve at all when they were cold, or dissolve them more powerfully or copiously when hot than cold; 'tis not unreasonable to suppose, that what considerably les∣sens Page  35 that agitation of the parts of the Menstruum that is necessary to the keeping the dissolved body in the state of fluidity, should occasion the falling of it again to the bottom. In slow operations I could give divers examples of the precipitating power of Cold; there being divers soluti∣ons and particularly that of Amber-greece, that I had kept fluid all the Summer, which in the Winter would subside. And the like may be some∣times observed in far less time in the solutions of Brimstone made in certain oleaginous Menstruums; and I have now & then had some solutions, and particularly one of Benzoin made in spirit of wine, that would sur∣prize me with the turbidness (which begins the state of Precipitation) it would acquire upon a sudden change of the weather towards Cold, though it were not in the winter season.
Another way of weakening the Menstruum and so causing the Preci∣pitation of a body dissolved in it, is Page  36 the diluting or lessening the tenaci∣ty of it, whether that tenacity pro∣ceed from viscosity or the compe∣tent number and constipation of the parts.
Of this we have an instance in the Magisteries (as many Chymists are pleased to call them) of Jalap, Ben∣zoin, and of divers others, Resi∣nous and Gummous bodies dissolved in spirit of wine. For by the affusion of common water, the Menstruum being too much diluted is not able to keep those particles in the state of fluidity, but must suffer them to sub∣side, (as they usually do in the form of white powder,) or, (as it may happen sometimes,) make some parts emerge. Examples also of this kind are afforded us by the common pre∣parations of Mercurius Vitae. For though in oil of Autimony, made by the Rectification of the butter, the saline particles are so numerous and keep so close to one another, that they are able to sustain the Antimo∣nial Page  37 Corpuscles they carried over with them in Distillation, and keep them together with themselves in the form of a liquor; yet when by the copious affusion of the water, those sustaining particles are separa∣ted and removed to a distance from each other, the Antimonial Cor∣puscles and the Mercurial (if any such there were,) being of a ponderous nature, will easily subside into that Emetic powder, which, (when well washed) the Chymists flatteringly enough call Mercurius Vitae.
But here I must interpose an ad∣vertisement, which will help to shew us, how much Precipitations depend upon the Mechanical contextures of bodies. For, though not only in the newly recited examples, but in divers others, the affusion of water, by diluting the salts and weaken∣ning the Menstruum, makes the me∣tall or other dissolved body fall pre∣cipitately to the bottom; yet if the saline particles of the solvent, and Page  38 those of the body be fitted for so strict an union, that the Corpuscles resulting from their Coalitions will not so easily be separated by the par∣ticles of water, as suffer themselves to be carried up and down with them, whether because of the mi∣nuteness of these compounded Cor∣puscles, or because of some congrui∣ty betwixt them and those of the water; they will not be precipitated out of the weakened solution, but still continue a part of it; as I have tryed partly with some solution of Silver and Gold, made in acid Men∣struums, but much more satisfacto∣rily in solutions of Copper, made in the urinous spirit of Sal Armoniac. For, though that blew solution were diluted with many thousand times as much distilled water as the dissolved metal weighed; yet its swimming Corpuscles did by their colour mani∣festly appear to be dispersed through the whole liquor.
Page  39
CHAP. VII.
BUT, to prosecute our former discourse, which we broke off after the mention of Mercurius Vitae, 'twill now be seasonable to add, that we have made divers other Precipi∣tations, by the bare affusion of wa∣ter, out of solutions, and sometimes out of distilled liquors; which, for brevity sake, I here omit, that I may hasten to the last way I shall now stay to mention.
Another way then, whereby Preci∣pitations of bodies may be produced by debilitating the Menstruum they swim in, is by lessening the propor∣tion of the Solvent to the Solutum, without any evaporation of the li∣quor. These last words I add, be∣cause that, when there is an obstruction or any other expulsi∣on of the Menstruum by heat, if Page  41 it be total, 'tis called Exsiccation, as when dry salt of Tartar is obtained from the filtrated Lixivium of the calcined Tartar; and though the evaporation be not total, yet the effects of it are not wont to be reckoned amongst Precipitati∣ons. And although the way, I am about to propose, if it be attentive∣ly considered, has much affinity with the foregoing, and the Phaenomena may perhaps in some sort be reduced to them; yet the instances that I shall name, having not, I know, been thought of by others, and being such as every one would not deduce from what I have been mentio∣ning, I shall add a word of the in∣ducements I had to make the try∣als, as well as of the success of them.
Considering then, that Water will not dissolve Salts indefinitely, but when it has received its due propor∣tion, 'twill then dissolve no more, but, if they be put into it, let them Page  40 fall to the ground and continue undissolved; and that if when water is satiated, any of the liquor be evaporated or otherwise wasted, it will in proportion let fall the salt it had already taken up; I conclu∣ded, that if I could mingle with water any liquor, with which its particles would more readily associ∣ate than with those of Salt, the depriving the solution of so many of its aqueous particles would be equivalent to the evaporation of as much water or thereabouts, as they, by being united, could compose. Wherefore making a lixivium of di∣stilled water or clean rain-water, and of Salt of Tartar so strong, that if a grain more were cast in it, it would lie undissolved at the bot∣tom; I put a quantity of this fiery Lixivium into a slender cylindrical vessel, till it had therein reached such a height as I thought fit; then taking as much as I thought suffi∣cient of strong spirit of wine, that Page  42 would burn every drop away, that so it might have no flegm nor wa∣ter of its own, I poured this upon the saline solution, and shaking the liquors pretty well together to bring them to mix as well as I could, I laid the tube in a quiet place, and afterwards found, as I expected, that there was a pretty quantity of white salt of Tartar fallen to the bottom of the vessel, which salt had been meerly forsaken by the aque∣ous particles that sustained it be∣fore, but forsook it to pass into the spirit of wine, wherewith they were more disposed to associate them∣selves; which I concluded, because having, before I poured on this last named liquor, made a mark on the glass to shew how far the lixivium reached, I found (what I looked for) that after the Precipitation, the Lixivium, that remained yet strong enough to continue unmixed with the incumbent spirit, had its surface not where the mark shewed it had Page  43 been before, but a considerable di∣stance beneath it, the spirit of wine having gained in extent what it lost in strength by receiving so many aqueous particles into it. I chose to make this tryal rather with a Lixi∣vium of Salt of Tartar than with oyl of Tartar per Deliquium, be∣cause in this last named liquor the aqueous and saline particles are more closely combined and there∣fore more difficult to be separated than I thought they would be in a Lixivium hastily made, though very strong. And though by much agi∣tation I have sometimes obtained some salt of Tartar from the above∣mentioned oil; yet the experiment succeeded nothing near so well with that liquor as with a Lixivium.
I made also the like tryal with ex∣ceedingly dephlegmed spirit of wine, and as strong a Brine as I could make of common salt dissolved with∣out heat in common water; and I thereby obtained no despicable pro∣portion of finely figured salt, that Page  44 was let fall to the bottom. But this experiment, to be succesful, requires greater care in him that makes it, than the former needs.
To confirm, and somewhat to vary this way of Precipitation, I shall add, that having made a clear solution of choice Gum Arabic in common water, and poured upon it a little high rectified spirit of wine, on this occasion there was also made, and that in a trice, a copious precipitation of a light and purely white substance not unpleasant to behold. And for further Confirma∣tion I dissolved a full proportion of Myrrhe in fair water, and into the filtrated solution, which was tran∣sparent, but of a high brown colour, I dropt a large proportion (which Circumstance is not to be omitted) of carefully dephlegm'd spirit of wine, which according to expecta∣tion made a copious Precipitate of the Gum. And these instances I the rather set down in this place, because they seem to show, that Page  45 simple water is a real Menstruum, which may have its dissolving and sustaining virtue weakened by the accession of Liquors, that are not doubted to be much stronger than it.
By specifying the hitherto menti∣oned wayes, whereby Precipitations may be Mechanically performed and accounted for, I would by no means be thought to deny, that there may be some omitted here, which either others that shall consider the matter with more attention, or I my self, if I shall have leisure to do it, may think on. For I propose these but as the chief that occurr to my present thoughts; and I forbear to add more instances to exemplifie them, because I would not injure some of my other papers, that have a greater right to those Instances. Only this I shall note in general, that the Doctrine and History of Preci∣pitations, if well delivered, will be a thing of more extent and moment than seems hitherto to have been imagined; since not only several of Page  46 the changes in the blood and other liquors and juices of the humane body may thereby be the better un∣derstood; and they prevented, or their ill consequences remedied; but in the practical part of Minera∣logy divers usefull things may pro∣bably be performed by the assist∣ance of such a Doctrine and Histo∣ry. To keep which conjecture from seeming extravagant, I shall only here intimate, that 'tis not a∣lone in bodies that are naturally or permanently liquid, but in those solid and ponderous bodies, that are for a short time made so by the violence of the fire, that many of the things suggested by this Do∣ctrine may have place. For whilst divers of those Bodies are in fusion, they may be treated as liquors; and metalls, and perhaps other hetero∣geneous bodies may be obtained from them by fit though dry Pre∣cipitants, as in some other writings I partly did, and may elsewhere yet further, declare.
FINIS.
Page  [unnumbered]
Experiments and Notes ABOUT THE MECHANICAL PRODUCTION OF Magnetism. By the Honourable ROBERT BOYLE Esq; Fellow of the R. Society.
LONDON, Printed by E. Flesher, for R. Davis Bookseller in Oxford. 1676.
Page  [unnumbered]Page  [unnumbered]
ADVERTISEMENT Concerning the following NOTES About OCCULT QUALITIES.
THE following Papers (about Magnetism and Electricity) would appear with less disad∣vantage, if the Author's willingness and Promise, that this Tome should be fur∣nished with notes about some Occult Qualities, as well as about divers sorts of those that are presumed to be Manifest, did not prevail with him to let the ensu∣ing Notes appear without those about the Pores of Bodies and Figures of Corpuscles, that should have preceded them, and some others that should have Page  [unnumbered] accompanied them. But the Author chose rather to venture these Papers abroad in the Condition, such as 'tis, they now appear in, than make those already printed about manifest Quali∣ties stay longer for Accessions, which some troublesome Accidents will not suffer him to hasten to the press; and without which, he now fears this Tome may swell to a more than competent Bulk.
Page  1
Experiments and Notes ABOUT THE Mechanical Production OF MAGNETICAL QUALITIES.
THough the vertues of the Loadstone be none of the least famous of Occult Quali∣ties, and are perhaps the most justly admired; yet I shall venture to offer something to make it probable, that some, even of these, may be in∣troduced into bodies by the pro∣duction of Mechanical changes in them.
To make way for what I am to deliver to this purpose, it will be ex∣pedient Page  2 to remove that general and settled prejudice, that has kept men from so much as thinking of any Mechanical account of Magnetisms, which is a belief, that these Qualities do immediately flow from the Sub∣stantial Form of the Loadstone, whose abstruse nature is dispropor∣tionate to our understandings. [EXPER. I] But for my part, I con∣fess, I see no necessity of admitting this sup∣position; for I see, that a piece of Steel fitly shaped and well excited, will, like a Loadstone, have its de∣terminate Poles, and with them point at the North and South; it will draw other pieces of Iron and Steel to it, and which is more, communi∣cate to them the same kind, though not degree, of attractive and dire∣ctive vertue it had it self, and will possess these faculties not as light and transient impressions, but as such setled and durable Powers that it may retain them for many years, if the Loadstone, to which it has been Page  3 duly applied, were vigorous enough: Of which sort I remember I have seen one (and made some tryals with it) that yielded an income to the owner, who received money from Navigators and others for suf∣fering them to touch their needles, swords, knives &c. at his excellent Magnet. Now, in a piece of steel or iron thus excited, 'tis plain, that the Magnetic operations may be re∣gularly performed for whole years by a body, to which the form of a Loadstone does not belong, since, as it had its own form before, so it retains the same still, continuing as malleable, fusible &c. as an ordinary piece of the same metal unexcited: so that, if there be introduced a fit disposition into the internal parts of the metal by the action of the Load∣stone, the metal, continuing of the same Species it was before, will need nothing save the continuance of that acquired disposition to be capable of performing Magnetical Operati∣ons; and if this disposition or inter∣nal Page  4 constitution of the excited iron be destroyed, though the form of the metal be not at all injured, yet the former power of Attraction shall be abolished, [EXPER. II] as appears when an excited iron is made red hot in the fire, and suffered to cool again.
And here give me leave to take notice of what I have elsewhere re∣lated to another purpose, [EXPER. III] namely that a Loadstone may (as I have more than once tryed) be easily deprived by ig∣nition of its Power of sensibly at∣tracting Martial bodies, and yet be scarce, if at all, visibly changed, but continue a true Loadstone in other capacities, which, according to the vulgar Philosophy ought to depend upon its Substantial Form, and the Loadstone thus spoiled may, not∣withst••d••• this Form, have its 〈…〉 at pleasure like a Page  5 piece of Iron; as I have else∣where particularly declared.
And I will confirm what I have been saying with an experiment that you do not perhaps expect; namely, that though it be generally taken for granted (without being contra∣dicted that I know of by any man) that, in a sound Loadstone, that has never been injured by the fire, not only the attractive Power, but the particular Vertue that it has to point constantly, when left to it self, with one of its determinate ex∣treams to one determinate pole, flowes immediately from the sub∣stantial or at least essential Form; yet this Form remaining undestroy∣ed by Fire, the Poles may be chan∣ged, and that with ease and speed. For among my notes about Magne∣tical Experiments, whence I bor∣row some passages of this paper, I find the following Account.
Page  6
EXPER. IV.
TO shew that the virtue that a Loadstone hath by this deter∣minate Pole or Extream to attract, for example, the South-end of a poi∣sed needle, and with the opposite extream or Pole the North-end of the same needle, I made among other tryals the following Experiment.
Taking a very small fragment of a Loadstone, I found, agreeably to my conjecture, that by applying sometimes one Pole, sometimes the other, to that pole of (a small but) a very vigorous Loadstone that was fit for my purpose, I could at plea∣sure, in a few minutes, change the Poles of the little fragment, as I tryed by its operations upon a needle freely poised; though by applying a fragment a pretty deal bigger, (for in it self it appeared very small,) I was not able in far more hours than I employed minutes before, to make any sensible change of the Poles.
Page  7 This short Memorial being added to the preceding part of this dis∣course, will, I hope, satisfie you, that how unanimously so ever men have deduced all magnetick operations from the form of the Loadstone; yet some internal change of pores or some other Mechanical alterati∣ons or inward disposition, either of the excited Iron or of the Load∣stone it self, may suffice to make a body capable or uncapable of exer∣cising some determinate magnetical operations; which may invite you to cast a more unprejudiced eye up∣on those few particulars, I shall now subjoin to make it probable, that even Magnetical Qualities may be Mechanically produced or altered.
EXPER. V.
I Have often observed in the shops of Artificers, as Smiths, Turners of metals &c. that, when hardened and well tempered tools are well heated by Attrition, if Page  8 whilest they are thus warmed you apply them to filings or chips, as they call them, or thin fragments of Steel or Iron, they will take them up, as if the instruments were touch∣ed with a Loadstone: but as they will not do so, unless they be thus excited by rubbing till they be warm∣ed, by which means a greater com∣motion is made in the inner parts of he Steel so neither would they retain so vigorous a Magnetism as to support the little frag∣ments of Steel that stuck to them after they were grown cold a∣gain. Which may be confirmed by what, if I much misremember not, I shewed some Acquaintances of yours; which was, that, by barely rubbing a conveniently
EXPER. VI.
shaped piece of Steel against the floor till it had gained a sufficient heat, it would whilest it continu∣ed so, discover a manifest, though but faint attractive power, which vanished together with the adventi∣tious Heat.
Page  9
EXPER. VII.
WE elsewhere observe, which perhaps you also may have done, that the Iron bars of windows, by having stood very long in an erected posture, may at length grow Magnetical, so that, if you apply the North point of a poised and exci∣ted Needle to the bottom of the Bar, it will drive it away, & attract the Southern; and if you raise the magnetick needle to the upper part of the Bar, and apply it as before, this will draw the Northern extream, which the other end of the bar ex∣pelled; probably because, as 'tis elsewhere declared, the bar is in tract of time, by the continual action of the Magnetical effuvia of the Tar∣raqueous Globe, turned into a kind of Magnet, whose lower end becomes the North-pole of it, and the other the Southern. Therefore accor∣ding to the Magnetical Laws, the former must expel the Northern ex∣tream Page  10 of the Needle, and the later draw it.
EXPER. VIII.
I Have found indeed, and I que∣stion not but other observers may have done so too, that, if a bar of Iron, that has not stood long in an erected posture, be but held per∣pendicular, the forementioned ex∣periment will succeed, (probably up∣on such an account as that I have lately intimated:) But then this vir∣tue, displayed by the extreams of the bar of Iron, will not be at all permanent, but so transient, that, if the bar be but inverted and held again upright, that end which just before was the uppermost, and drew the north-end of the needle, will now, being lowermost, drive it away, which, as was lately observed, will not happen to a bar which has been some years or other competent time kept in the same Position. So that, Page  11 since length of time is requisite to make the verticity of a bar of Iron so durable & constant, that the same extream will have the same virtues in reference to the Magnetical needle, whether you make it the upper end or the lower end of the bar, it seems not improbable to me, that by length of time the whole Magnetick virtue of this Iron may be increased, and consequently some degree of at∣traction acquired.
And by this Consideration I shall endeavour to explicate that strange thing, that is reported by some Moderns to have happened in Italy, where a bar of Iron is affirmed to have been converted into a Load∣stone, whereof a piece was kept a∣mong other rarities in the curious Aldrovandus his Musaeum Metallicum. For considering the greatness of its Specific Gravity, the malleableness and other properties, wherein Iron differs from Loadstone, I cannot easi∣ly believe, that, by such a way as is mentioned, a metal should be turned Page  12 into a stone. And therefore, having consulted the book it self, whence this Relation was borrowed, I found the story imperfectly enough delive∣red: The chiefest and clearest thing in it being, that at the top of the Church of Arimini a great iron-bar, that was placed there to support a Cross of an hundred pound weight, was at length turned into a Load∣stone. But whether the reality of this transmutation was examined, and how it appeared that the frag∣ment of the Loadstone presented to Aldrovandus was taken from that bar of Iron, I am not fully satisfied by that Narrative. Therefore, when I remember the great resemblance I have sometimes seen in colour, be∣sides other manifest Qualities, be∣twixt some Loadstones and some course or almost rusty Iron, I am tempted to Conjecture, that those that observed this Iron-bar when broken to have acquired a strong Magnetical virtue, which they dreamed not that tract of time might Page  13 communicate to it, might easily be perswaded, by this virtue and the re∣semblance of colour, that the Iron was turned into Loadstone: espe∣cially they being prepossess'd with that Aristotelian Maxim, whence our Author would explain this strange Phaenomenon, that inter Symbolum ha∣bentia facilis est transmutatio.
But, leaving this as a bare conje∣cture, we may take notice, that what virtue an oblong piece of Iron may need a long tract of time to acquire, by the help onely of its position, may be imparted to it in a very short time, by the intervention of such a nimble agent, as the fire. As may be often, though not always, observed in Tongs, [EXPER. IX] and such like Iron Utensils, that, having been ignited, have been set to cool, leaning against some wall or other prop, that kept them in an erected posture, which makes it probable that the great commotion of the parts, made by the vehement heat of the fire, disposed Page  14 the Iron, whilst it was yet soft, and had its pores more lax, and parts more pliable, disposed it, I say, to re∣ceive much quicker impressions from the Magnetical effluvia of the Earth, than it would have done, if it had still been cold. [EXPER. X] And 'tis very ob∣servable to our present purpose, what differing ef∣fects are produced by the operation of the fire, upon two Magnetick bo∣dies according to their respective constitutions. For, by keeping a Loadstone red-hot, though you cool it afterwards in a perpendicular po∣sture, you may deprive it of its for∣mer power of manifestly attracting: But a bar of Iron being ignited, and set to cool perpendicularly, does thereby acquire a manifest verticity. Of which differing events I must not now stay to inquire, whether or no the true reason be, That the peculiar Texture or internal constitution that makes a Loadstone somewhat more than an ordinary Ore of Iron, (which Page  15 metal, as far as I have tried, is the usual ingredient of Loadstones) be∣ing spoiled by the violence of the fire, this rude Agent leaves it in the con∣dition of common Iron, or perhaps of ignited Iron-ore: whereas the fire does soften the Iron it self (which is a metal not an Ore) agita∣ting its parts, and making them the more flexible, and by relaxing its pores, disposes it to be easily and plentifully pervaded by the Magne∣tical steams of the Earth, from which it may not improbably be thought to receive the verticity it acquires; and this the rather, because, as I have often tryed, and elsewhere mention∣ed, [EXPER. XI] if an oblong Loadstone, once spoil'd by the fire, be thorowly ignited and cooled ei∣ther perpendicularly, or lying hori∣zontally North and South, it will, as well as a piece of Iron handled after the same manner, be made to acquire new poles, or change the old ones, as the skilful experimenter pleases. Page  16 But whatever be the true cause of the disparity of the fires operation upon a sound Loadstone and a bar of Iron, the effect seems to strengthen our conjecture, That Magnetical o∣perations may much depend upon Mechanical Principles. And I hope you will find further probability ad∣ded to it, by some Phaenomena reci∣ted in another paper, to which I once committed some promiscuous Experiments and Observations Mag∣netical.
EXPER. XII.
IF I may be allowed to borrow an Experiment from a little Tract* that yet lyes by me, and has been seen but by two or three friends, it may be added to the instances al∣ready given about the production of Magnetism. For in that Experiment I have shewn, how having brought a good piece of a certain kind of Eng∣lish Oker, which yet perhaps was no Page  17 fitter than other, to a convenient shape, though, till it was altered by the fire, it discovered no Magnetical Quality; yet af∣ter it had been kept red-hot in the fire and was suffered to cool in a convenient posture, it was enabled to exercise Magne∣tical operations upon a pois'd Needle.
EXPER. XIII.
AS for the Abolition of the Magneti∣cal vertue in a body endow'd with it, it may be made without destroying the Substantial or the Essential Form of the body, and without sensibly adding, dimi∣nishing, or altering any thing in reference to the Salt, Sulphur and Mercury, which Chymists presume Iron and Steel, as well as other mixt bodies, to be composed of. For it has been sometimes observed, that the bare continuance of a Loadstone it self in a contrary position to that, which, when freely placed, it seems to effect, has either corrupted or sensibly lessened the vertue of it. What I formerly observed to this purpose. I elsewhere relate, and since that having a Loadstone, whose vi∣gor was look'd upon by skilfu• persons as very extraordinary, and which, whilst it was in an Artificers hand, was therefore held at a high rate, I was careful, being Page  18 by some occasions call'd out of London, to lock it up, with some other rarities, in a Cabinet, whereof I took the key along with me, and still kept it in my own Pocket. But my stay abroad proving much longer than I expected, when, being re∣turned to London, I had occasion to make use of this Loadstone for an Experiment, I found it indeed where I left it, but so exceedingly decayed, as to its attractive power, which I had formerly examin'd by weight, by having lain almost a year in an inconvenient posture, that if it had not been for the circumstances newly related, I should have concluded that some body had purposely got it out in my absence, and spoiled it by help of the fire, the ver∣tue being so much impaired, that I cared little to employ it any more about consi∣derable Experiments. [EXPER. XIV] And this corruption of the Magnetical vertue, which may in tract of time be made in a Loadstone it self, may in a trice be made by the help of that Stone in an excited Needle. For 'tis observ'd by Magnetical Writers, and my own Trials purposely made have assured me of it, that a well pois'd Needle, being by the touch of a good Loadstone, excited and brought to turn one of its ends to the North and the Page  19 other to the South, it may be a contrary touch of the same Loadstone be deprived of the faculty it had of directing its de∣terminate extreams to determinate Poles. Nay, by another touch (or the same, and even without immediate Contact, if the Magnet be vigorous enough) the Needle may presently have its direction so chan∣ged, that the end, which formerly poin∣ted to the North pole, shall now regard the South, and the other end shall instead of the Southern, respect the Northen pole.
EXPER. XV.
AND to make it the more probable, that the change of the Magnetism communicated to Iron may be produc'd at least in good part by Mechanical ope∣rations, procuring some change of texture in the Iron; I shall subjoyn a notable Ex∣periment of the ingenious Doctor Power, which when I heard of, I tryed as well as I could; and though, perhaps for want of conveniency, I could not make it fully an∣swer what it promised, yet the success of the trial was considerable enough to make it pertinent in this place, and to induce me to think, it might yet better succeed with him, whose Experiment, as far as it concerns my present purpose, imports, that Page  20 if a Puncheon, as Smiths call it, or a Rod of Iron, be, by being ignited and suffered to cool North and South, and hammered at the ends, very manifestly endow'd with Magnetical vertue, this vertue will in a trice be destroyed, by two or three smart blows of a strong hammer upon the middle of the oblong piece of Iron.
But Magnetism is so fertile a Subject, that if I had now the leisure and conveniency to range among Magnetical Writers, I should scarce doubt of finding, among their many Experiments and Observati∣ons, divers that might be added to those above delivered, as being easily applicable to my present Argument. And I hope you will find farther probability added to what has been said, to shew, that Magne∣tical operations may much depend upon Me∣chanical Principles, by some Phaenomena re∣cited in another Paper, to which I once committed some promiscuous Experiments and Observations Magnetical.
FINIS.
Page  [unnumbered]
Experiments and Notes ABOUT THE MECHANICAL ORIGINE OR PRODUCTION OF Electricity. By the Honourable ROBERT BOYLE Esq; Fellow of the R. Society.
LONDON, Printed by E. Flesher, for R. Davis Bookseller in Oxford. 1675.
Page  [unnumbered]Page  1
Experiments and Notes ABOUT THE MECHANICAL ORIGINE OR PRODUCTION OF Electricity.
THat 'tis not necessary to be∣lieve Electrical Attraction (which you know is gene∣rally listed among Occult Qualities) to be the effect of a naked and soli∣tary Quality flowing immediately from a Substantial Form; but that it may rather be the effect of a Materi∣al Effluvium, issuing from, and re∣turning to, the Electrical Body (and Page  2 perhaps in some cases assisted in its Operation by the external air) seems agreable to divers things that may be observ'd in such Bodies and their manner of acting.
There are differing Hypotheses (and all of them Mechanical, pro∣pos'd by the Moderns) to solve the Phaenomena of Electrical Attraction. Of these Opinions the First is that of the learned Jesuite Cabaeus, who, though a Peripatetick and Commen∣tator on Aristotle, thinks the draw∣ing of light Bodies by Jet, Amber, &c. may be accounted for, by suppo∣sing, that the steams that issue, or, if I may so speak, sally, out of Amber, when heated by rubbing, discuss and expell the neighbouring air; which after it has deen driven off a little way, makes as it were a small whirl∣wind, because of the resistance it finds from the remoter air, which has not been wrought on by the E∣lectrical Steams; and that these, shrinking back swiftly enough to the Amber, do in their returns bring a∣long Page  3 with them such light bodies as they meet with in their way. On occasion of which Hypothesis I shall offer it to be consider'd, Whether by the gravity of the Atmospheri∣cal Air, surmounting the Specifick Gravity of the little and rarifi'd At∣mosphere, made about the Amber by its emissions, and comprising the light Body fasten'd on by them, the Attraction may not in divers cases be either caused or promoted.
Another Hypothesis is that propo∣sed by that Ingenious Gentleman Sir Kenelm Digby, and embraced by the very Learned Dr. Browne, (who seems to make our Gilbert himself to have been of it) and divers other sagacious men. And according to this Hypothesis, the Amber, or other Electrick, being chaf'd or heated, is made to emit certain Rayes or Files of unctuous Steams, which, when they come to be a little cool'd by the external air, are somewhat condens'd, and having lost of their former agitation, shrink back to the Page  4 body whence they sallied out, and carry with them those light bodies, that their further ends happen to ad∣here to, at the time of their Retra∣ction: As when a drop of Oyl or Syrup hangs from the end of a small stick, if that be dextrously and cautiously struck, the viscous sub∣stance will, by that impulse, be stretch'd out, and presently retreat∣ing, will bring along with it the dust or other light bodies that chanced to stick to the remoter parts of it.
And this way of explaining Ele∣ctrical Attractions is employ'd also by the Learned Gassendus, who addes to it, that these Electrical Rays (if they may be so call'd) being emitted several ways, and conse∣quently crossing one another, get in∣to the pores of the Straw, or other light body to be attracted, and by means of their Decussation take the faster hold of it, and have the greater force to carry it along with them, when they shrink back to the Am∣ber Page  5 whence they were emitted.
A third Hypothesis there is, which was devised by the Acute Cartesius, who dislikes the Explications of o∣thers, chiefly because he thinks them not applicable to Glass, which he supposes unfit to send forth Effluvia, and which is yet an Electrical body; and therefore attempts to account for Electrical Attractions by the in∣tervention of certain particles, shap'd almost like small pieces of Ribbond, which he supposes to be form'd of this subtile matter har∣bour'd in the pores or crevises of Glass. But this Hypothesis, though ingenious in it self, yet depending upon the knowledge of divers of his peculiar Principles, I cannot in∣telligibly propose it in few words, and therefore shall re∣fer you to himself for an account of it:* which I the less scruple to do, because though it be not unworthy of the wonted Acuteness of the Authour, yet he seems himself to doubt, whe∣ther Page  6 it will reach all Electrical Bo∣dies; and it seems to me, that the reason why he rejects the way of explicating Attraction by the Emis∣sion of the finer parts of the at∣trahent (to which Hypothesis, if it be rightly proposed, I confess my self very inclinable) is grounded upon a mistake, which, though a Philosopher may, for want of Ex∣perience in that Particular, without disparagement fall into, is never∣theless a mistake. For whereas our excellent Author says, that Electrical Effluvia, such as are supposed to be emitted by Amber, Wax, &c. can∣not be imagin'd to proceed from Glass, I grant the Supposition to be plausible, but cannot allow it to be true. For as solid a body as Glass is, yet if you but dextrously rub for two or three minutes a couple of pie∣ces of Glass against one another, you will find that Glass is not onely capa∣ble of emitting Effluvia, but such ones as to be odorous, and sometimes to be rankly stinking.
Page  7 But it is not necessary, that in this Paper, where I pretend not to write Discourses but Notes, I should con∣sider all that has been, or I think may be, said for and against each of the above-mentioned Hypotheses; since they all agree in what is suffici∣ent for my present purpose, namely, that Electrical Attractions are not the Effects of a meer Quality, but of a Substantial Emanation from the attracting Body: And 'tis plain, that they all endeavour to solve the Phaenomena in a Mechanical way, without recurring to Substantial Forms, and inexplicable Qualities, or so much as taking notice of the Hypostatical Principles of the Chy∣mists. Wherefore it may suffice in this place, that I mention-some Phae∣nomena that in general make it pro∣bable, that Amber, &c. draws such light Bodies, as pieces of Straw, Hair, and the like, by vertue of some Me∣chanical Affections either of the at∣tracting or of the attracted Bodies, or of both the one and the other.
Page  8 1. The first and most general Ob∣servation is, That Electrical Bodies draw not unless they be warm'd; which Rule though I have now and then found to admit of an Exception, (whereof I elsewhere offer an ac∣count,) yet, as to the generality of common Electricks, it holds well e∣nough to give much countenance to our Doctrine, which teaches the ef∣fects of Electrical Bodies to be per∣form'd by Corporeal Emanations. For 'tis known, that Heat, by agi∣tating the parts of a fit Body, solicites it as it were to send forth its Effluvia, as is obvious in odoriferous Gums and Perfumes, which, being heated, send forth their fragrant steams, both further and more copiously than o∣therwise they would.
2. Next, it has been observ'd, that Amber, &c. warm'd by the fire, does not attract so vigorously, as if it ac∣quire an equal degree of heat by being chaf'd or rub'd: So that the modification of motion in the inter∣nal parts, and in the Emanations of Page  9 the Amber, may, as well as the de∣gree of it, contribute to the Attracti∣on. And my particular Observati∣ons incline me to adde, that the ef∣fect may oftentimes be much pro∣moted, by employing both these ways successively; as I thought I ma∣nifestly found when I first warm'd the Amber at the fire, and present∣ly after chaf'd it a little upon a piece of cloth. For then a very few rub∣bings seem'd to excite it more than many more would otherwise have done: As if the heat of the fire had put the parts into a general, but confus'd, agitation; to which 'twas easie for the subsequent Attrition (or Reciprocation of Pressure) to give a convenient modification in a Body whose Texture disposes it to become vigorously Electrical.
3. Another Observation that is made about these Bodies, is, That they require Tersion as well as At∣trition; and though I doubt whether the Rule be infallible, yet I deny not but that weaker Electricks re∣quire Page  10 to be as well wip'd as chaf'd; and even good ones will have their Operation promoted by the same means. And this is very agreeable to our Doctrine, since Tersion, be∣sides that it is, as I have sometimes manifestly known it, a kind or de∣gree of Attrition, frees the Surface from those adherences that might choak the pores of the Amber, or at least hinder the emanation of the steams to be so free and copious as o∣therwise it would be.
4. 'Tis likewise observ'd, That whereas the Magnetical Steams are so subtile, that they penetrate and perform their Operation through all kind of Mediums hitherto known to us; Electrical Steams are like those of some odoriferous Bodies, easily check'd in their progress, since 'tis affirm'd by Learned Writers, who say they speak upon particular Trial, 〈…〉 of the finest 〈◊〉 or 〈◊〉 is sufficient to hin∣der 〈…〉 Operation of excited Amber upon a Straw or Feather Page  11 plac'd never so little beyond it.
5. It has been also observed, that the effects of Electrical Attraction are weaken'd if the air be thick and cloudy; and especially if the South∣wind blows: And that Electricks dis∣play their vertue more faintly by night than by day, and more vigo∣rously in clear weather, and when the winds are Northerly. All which the Learned Kircherus asserts himself to have found true by experience; insomuch that those bodies that are but faintly drawn when the weather is clear, will not, when 'tis thick and cloudy, be at all moved.
6. We have also observed, That divers Concretes, that are notably Electrical, do abound in an effluvi∣able matter (if I may so call it) which is capable of being manifest∣ly evaporated by heat and rubbing. Thus we see, that most Resinous Gums, that draw light bodies, do also, being moderately solicited by heat, (whether this be excited by the fire, or by Attrition or Contusi∣on) Page  12 emit steams. And in pieces of Sulphur conveniently shaped, I found upon due Attrition a Sulphureous stink. And that piece of Amber which I most employ, being some∣what large and very well polish'd, will, being rub'd upon a piece of woollen cloth, emit steams, which the nostrils themselves may per∣ceive; and they sometimes seem to me not unlike those that I took no∣tice of, when I kept in my mouth a drop or two of the diluted Tincture (or Solution of the finer parts) of Amber made with Spirit of Wine, or of Sal Armoniac.
7. It agrees very well with what has been said of the corporeal Ema∣nations of Amber, that its attractive power will continue some time after it has been once excited. For the Attrition having caus'd an intestine commotion in the parts of the Con∣crete, the heat or warmth that is thereby excited ought not to cease, as soon as ever the rubbing is over, but to continue capable of emitting Page  13Effluvia for some time afterwards, which will be longer or shorter ac∣cording to the goodness of the E∣lectric, and the degree of the Ante∣cedent commotion: which joyn'd together may sometimes make the effect considerable, insomuch that in a warm day, about noon, I did with a certain body, not much, if at all, bigger than a Pea, but very vi∣gorously attractive, move to and fro a Steel Needle freely poysed, about three minutes (or the twentieth part of an hour) after I had left off rubbing the Attrahent.
8. That it may not seem impossi∣ble, that Electrical Effluvia should be able to insinuate themselves into the pores of many other bodies, I shall adde, that I found them subtile e∣nough to attract not onely Spirit of Wine, but that fluid aggregate of Corpuscles we call Smoak. For ha∣ving well lighted a Wax-taper, which I preferr'd to a common Candle to avoid the stink of the snuff, I blew out the flame; and, when the smoak Page  14 ascended in a slender stream, held, at a convenient distance from it, an ex∣cited piece of Amber or a chafed Diamond, which would manifestly make the ascending smoak deviate from its former line, and turn aside, to beat, as it were, against the Electric, which, if it were vigorous, would act at a considerable distance, and seemed to smoak for a pretty while together.
9. That 'tis not in any peculiar Sympathy between an Electric and a body whereon it operates, that E∣lectrical Attraction depends, seems the more probale, because Amber, for instance, does not attract onely one determinate sort of bodies, as the Loadstone does Iron, and those bodies wherein it abounds; but as far as I have yet tried, it draws indiffe∣rently all bodies whatsoever, being plac'd within a due distance from it, (as my choicest piece of Amber draws not onely Sand and Mineral Powders, but Filings of Steel and Copper, and beaten Gold it self) Page  15 provided they be minute or light e∣nough, except perhaps it be fire: I employ the word perhaps, because I am not yet so clear in this point. For having applied a strong Electric at a convenient distance to small fragments of ignited matter, they were readily enough attracted, and shin'd, whilst they were sticking to the body that had drawn them: But when I look'd attentively upon them, I found the shining sparks to be, as it were, cloath'd with light ashes, which, in spite of my dili∣gence, had been already form'd a∣bout the attracted Corpuscles, upon the expiring of a good part of the fire; so that it remain'd somewhat doubtful to me, whether the ignited Corpuscles, whilst they were to∣tally such, were attracted; or whe∣ther the immediate objects of the Attraction were not the new form'd ashes, which carried up with them those yet unextinguished parts of fire, that chanc'd to be lodg'd in them. But, as for flame, our Countreyman Page  16Gilbert delivers as his Experiment, That an Electric, though duly exci∣ted and applied, will not move the flame of the slenderest Candle. Which some will think not so easie to be well tried with common E∣lectricks, as Amber, hard Wax, Sul∣phur, and the like unctuous Con∣cretes, that very easily take fire: Therefore I chose to make my Tri∣al with a rough Diamond extraor∣dinarily attractive, which I could, without injuring it, hold as near as I pleas'd to the flame of a Candle or Taper; and though I was not satis∣fi'd that it did either attract the flame, as it visibly did the smoak, or mani∣festly agitate it; yet granting that Gilbert's Assertion will constantly hold true, and so, that flame is to be excepted from the general Rule, yet this exception may well comport with the Hypothesis hitherto counte∣nanc'd, since it may be said, as 'tis, if I mistake not, by Kirkerus, that the heat of the flame dissipates the Effluvia, by whose means the At∣traction Page  17 should be perform'd. To which I shall adde, that possibly the Celerity of the motion of the Flame upwards, may render it very diffi∣cult for the Electrical Emanations to divert the Flame from its Course.
10. We have found by Experi∣ment, That a vigorous and well ex∣cited piece of Amber will draw, not onely the powder of Amber, but less minute fragments of it. And as in many cases one contrary directs to another, so this Trial suggested a further, which, in case of good suc∣cess, would probably argue, that in Electrical Attraction not onely Efflu∣via are emitted by the Electrical bo∣dy, but these Effluvia fasten upon the body to be drawn, and that in such a way, that the intervening vis∣cous strings, which may be supposed to be made up of those cohering Ef∣fluvia, are, when their agitation cea∣ses, contracted or made to shrink in∣wards towards both ends, almost as a highly stretch'd Lute-string does when 'tis permitted to retreat into Page  18 shorter Dimensions. But the Con∣jecture it self was much more easie to be made than the Experiment re∣quisite to examine it. For we found it no easie matter to suspend an E∣lectric, great and vigorous enough, in such a manner, that it might, whilst suspended, be excited, and be so nicely poised, that so faint a force as that wherewith it attracts light bo∣dies should be able to procure a Lo∣cal Motion to the whole Body it self. But after some fruitless attempts with other Electricks, I had recourse to the very vigorous piece of po∣lish'd Amber, formerly mention'd, and when we had with the help of a little Wax suspended it by a silken thread, we chafed very well one of the blunt edges of it upon a kind of large Pin-cushion cover'd with a course and black woollen stuff, and then brought the Electric, as soon as we could, to settle notwithstanding its hanging freely at the bottom of the string. This course of rubbing on the edge of the Amber we pitch'd Page  19 upon for more than one reason; for if we had chafed the flat side, the Amber could not have approached the body it had been rub'd on with∣out making a change of place in the whole Electric, and, which is worse, without making it move (contrary to the nature of heavy bodies) somewhat upwards; whereas the Amber having, by reason of its sus∣pension, its parts counterpoised by one another; to make the excited edge approach to another body, that edge needed not at all ascend, but onely be moved horizontally, to which way of moving the gravity of the Electric (which the string kept from moving downwards) could be but little or no hinderance. And a∣greeably to this we found, that if, as soon as the suspended and well rubb'd Electric was brought to set∣tle freely, we applied to the chafed edge, but without touching it, the lately mention'd Cushion, which, by reason of its rough Superficies and porosity, was fit for the Electrical Page  20Effluvia to fasten upon, the edge would manifestly be drawn aside by the Cushion steadily held, and if this were slowly removed, would follow it a good way; and when this body no longer detain'd it, would return to the posture wherein it had settled before. And this pow∣er of approaching the Cushion by vertue of the operation of its own steams, was so durable in our vigo∣rous piece of Amber, that by once chafing it, I was able to make it fol∣low the Cushion no less than ten or eleven times. Whether from such Experiments one may argue, that 'tis but, as 'twere, by accident that Am∣ber attracts another body, and not this the Amber; and whether these ought to make us question, if Ele∣ctricks may with so much propriety, as has been hitherto generally suppo∣sed, be said to Attract, are doubts that my Design does not here oblige me to examine.
Some other Phaenomena might be added of the same Tendency with Page  21 those already mention'd, (as the ad∣vantage that Electrical Bodies usual∣ly get by having well polish'd or at least smooth Surfaces,) but the Ti∣tle of this Paper promising some Ex∣periments about the Production of E∣lectricity, I must not omit to recite, how I have been sometimes able to produce or destroy this Quality in certain bodies, by means of altera∣tions, that appear'd not to be other than Mechanical.
EXPER. I.
ANd first, having with a very mild heat slowly evaporated about a fourth part of good Turpentine, I found, that the remaining body would not, when cold, continue a Li∣quor, but harden'd into a transpa∣rent Gum almost like Amber, which, as I look'd for, proved Electrical.
Page  22
EXPER. II.
SEcondly, by mixing two such li∣quid Bodies as Petroleum and strong Spirit of Nitre in a certain proportion, and then distilling them till there remained a dry mass, I ob∣tain'd a brittle substance as black as Jet; and whose Superficies (where it was contiguous to the Retort) was glossie like that Mineral when po∣lished; and as I expected I found it also to resemble Jet, in being en∣dowed with an Electrical Faculty.
EXPER. III.
THirdly, Having burnt Antimo∣ny to ashes, and of those ashes, without any addition, made a trans∣parent Glass, I found, that, when rubb'd, as Electrical Bodies ought to be to excite them, it answer'd my ex∣pectation, by manifesting a not incon∣siderable Electricity. And this is the worthier of notice, because, that as a Page  23Vitrum Antimonii, that is said to be purer than ordinary, may be made of the Regulus of the same Mineral, in whose preparation you know a great part of the Antimonial Sul∣phur is separated and left among the Scoriae; so Glass of Antimony made without additament, may easily, as experience has inform'd us, be in part reduc'd to a Regulus, (a Body not reckon'd amongst Electrical ones.) And that you may not think, that 'tis onely some peculiar and fixt part of the Antimony that is capable of Vitrification, let me assure you, that even with the other part that is wont to flye away, (namely the Flowers) an Antimonial Glass may without an addition of other Ingre∣dients be made.
EXPER. IV.
FOurthly, The mention of a Vi∣trified Body brings into my mind, that I more than once made some Glass of Lead per se, (which Page  24 I found no very easie work) that also was not wholly destitute of an Electrical Vertue, though it had but a very languid one. And it is not here to be overlook'd, that this Glass might easily be brought to afford a∣gain malleable Lead, which was ne∣ver reckon'd, that I know of, among Electrical Bodies.
EXPER. V.
FIfthly, Having taken some Am∣ber, and warily distill'd it, not with Sand or powder'd Brick, or some such additament as Chymists are wont to use, for fear it should boyl over or break their Vessels; but by its self, that I might have an un∣mixed Caput mortuum; Having made this Distillation, I say, and continued it till it had afforded a good propor∣tion of phlegm, Spirit, Volatile Salt, and Oyl, the Retort was warily bro∣ken, and the remaining matter was taken out in a lump, which, though it had quite lost its colour being Page  25 burnt quite black, and though it were grown strangely brittle in com∣parison of Amber, so that they who believe the vertue of attracting light Bodies to flow from the substantial form of Amber, would not expect it in a Body so changed and deprived of its noblest parts: Yet this Caput mortuum was so far from having lost its Electrical Faculty, that it seemed to attract more vigorously than Am∣ber it self is wont to do before it be committed to Distillation.
And from the foregoing Instances afforded us by the Glass of Antimo∣ny, we may learn, that when the form of a Body seems to be destroy∣ed by a fiery Analysis that dissipates the parts of it, the remaining sub∣stance may yet be endowed with E∣lectricity, as the Caput mortuum of Amber •ay acquire it; as in the case of the Glass of Antimony made of the Calx and of the Flowers. And from the second Example above∣mentioned, and from common Glass which is Electrical, we may also Page  26 learn, that Bodies that are neither of them apart observed to be endowed with Electricity, may have that Ver∣tue result in the compounded sub∣stance that they constitute, though it be but a factitious Body.
To the foregoing Experiments, whose Success is wont to be uniform enough, I shall adde the Recital of a surprising Phaenomenon, which, though not constant, may help to make it probable, that Electrical Attractions need not be suppos'd still to pro∣ceed from the substantial, or even from the essential Form of the At∣trahent; but may be the effects of unheeded, and, as it were, fortui∣tous Causes. And however, I dare not suppress so strange an Observa∣tion, and therefore shall relate that which I had the luck to make of an odd sort of Electrical Attraction (as it seem'd,) not taken notice of (that I know of) by any either Naturalist or other Writer, and it is this.
Page  27
EXPER. VI.
THat false Locks (as they call them) of some Hair, being by curling or otherwise brought to a certain degree of driness, or of stiffness, will be attracted by the flesh of some persons, or seem to apply themselves to it, as Hair is wont to do to Amber or Jet exci∣ted by rubbing. Of this I had a Proof in such Locks worn by two very Fair Ladies that you know. For at some times I observed, that they could not keep their Locks from flying to their Cheeks, and (though neither of them made any use, or had any need of Painting) from sticking there. When one of these Beauties first shew'd me this Experiment, I turn'd it into a Com∣plemental Raillery, as suspecting there might be some trick in it, though I after saw the same thing happen to the others Locks too. But as she is no ordinary Virtuosa, she ve∣ry Page  28 ingeniously remov'd my suspicions, and (as I requested) gave me leave to satisfie my self further, by desiring her to hold her warm hand at a conveni∣ent distance from one of those Locks taken off and held in the air. For as soon as she did this, the lower end of the Lock, which was free, appli∣ed it self presently to her hand: which seem'd the more strange, be∣cause so great a multitude of Hair would not have been easily attract∣ed by an ordinary Electrical Body, that had not been considerably large, or extraordinarily vigorous. This repeated Observation put me upon inquiring among some other young Ladies, whether they had ob∣served any such like thing, but I found little satisfaction to my Question, ex∣cept from one of them eminent for being ingenious, who told me, that sometimes she had met with these troublesome Locks; but that all she could tell me of the Circumstances, which I would have been inform'd about, was, that they seem'd to her Page  29 to flye most to her Cheeks when they had been put into a somewhat stiff Curle, and when the Weather was frosty. *
Some years after the making the Expe∣riments about the Production of Electrici∣ty, having a desire to try, whether in the Attractions made by Amber, the motions excited by the air had a considerable Inte∣rest, or whether the Effect were not due rather to the Emission and Retraction of Effluvia, which being of a viscous nature may consist of Particles either branch'd or hookt, or otherwise fit for some kind of Cohesion, and capable of being stretch'd, and of shrinking again, as Leather Thongs are: To examine this, I say, I thought the fittest way, if 'twere practicable, would be, to try, whether Amber would draw a light Body in a Glass whence the air was pumpt out. And though the Tri∣al of this seem'd very difficult to make, and we were somewhat discouraged by our first attempt, wherein the weight of the ambient air broke our Receiver, which chanced to prove too weak, when the internal air had been with extraor∣dinary diligence pumpt out; yet having a vigorous piece of Amber, which I had caus'd to be purposely turn'd and polish'd Page  30 for Electrical Experiments, I afterwards repeated the Trial, and found, that in warm Weather it would retain a manifest power of attracting for several minutes (for it stirred a pois'd Needle after above 1/4 of an hour) after we had done rubbing it. Upon which encouragement we sus∣pended it, being first well chafed, in a Glass Receiver that was not great, just over a light Body; and making haste with our Air-Pumb to exhaust th• Glass, when the Air was withdrawn, we did by a Contri∣vance let down the suspended Amber till it came very near the Straw or Feather, and perceived, as we expected, that in some Trials, upon the least Contact it would lift it up; and in others, for we repeated the Experiment, the Amber would raise it without touching it, that is, would attract it.
You will probably be the less dispos'd to believe, That Electrical Attractions must proceed from the Substantial Forms of the Attrahents, or rom the Predominancy of this or that Chymical Principle in them, if I acquaint you with some odd Trials wherein the Attraction of light Bo∣dies Page  31 seem'd to depend upon very small circumstances. And though forbearing at present, to offer you my thoughts about the cause of these surprising Phaenomena, I propose it onely as a Probleme to your self and your curious Friends, yet the main circumstances seeming to be of a Me∣chanical Nature, the recital of my Trials will not be impertinent to the Design and Subject of this Paper.
EXPER. VII.
I Took then a large and vigorous piece of Amber conveniently sha∣ped for my purpose, and a downy feather, such as grows upon the Bo∣dies, not Wings or Tails of a some∣what large Chicken: Then having moderately excited the Electrick, I held the Amber so near it, that the neighbouring part of the feather was drawn by it and stuck fast to it; but the remoter parts continued in their former posture. This done, I apply∣ed my fore-finger to these erected Page  32 downy feathers, and immediately, as I expected, they left their preceeding posture, and applied themselves to it as if it had been an Electrical Body. And whether I offered to them my nail, or the pulpy part of my finger, or held my finger towards the right hand or the left, or directly over, these downy feathers that were near the little Quill did nimbly, and, for ought appear'd, equally turn themselves to∣wards it, and fasten themselves to it. And to shew that the streams that is∣sued out of so warm a Body as my finger were not necessary to attract (as men speak) the abovementioned feathers, instead of my finger, I ap∣plied to them, after the same manner, a little Cylindrical Instrument of Sil∣ver, to which they bowed and fa∣stened themselves as they had done to my finger, though the tip of this Instrument were presented to them in several postures. The like success I had with the end of an Iron Key, and the like also with a cold piece of polish'd black Marble; and sometimes Page  33 the feathers did so readily and strong∣ly fasten themselves to these extra∣neous and unexcited Bodies, that I have been able (though not easily) to make one of them draw the fea∣ther from the Amber it self.
But it is diligently to be observ'd, that this unusual attraction happen∣ed onely whilst the electrical opera∣tion of the excited Amber continued strong enough to sustain the feathers. For afterwards, neither the approach of my finger, nor that of the other bodies, would make the downy fea∣thers change their posture. Yet as soon as ever the Amber was by a light affriction excited again, the fea∣ther would be disposed to apply it self again to the abovementioned Bodies.
And lest there should be any pecu∣liarity in that particular feather, I made the Trials with others (provi∣ded they were not long enough to exceed the sphere of activity of the Amber) and found the Experiment to answer my expectation.
Page  34 I made the Experiment also at dif∣fering times, and with some months, if not rather years, of interval, but with the like success.
And lest you should think these Phaenomena proceed from some pecu∣liarity in the piece of Amber I em∣ployed, I shall add, that I found uni∣formity enough in the success, when, in the place of Amber, I substituted another Electrick, and particularly a smooth mass of melted Brimstone.
These are the Phaenomena I thought fit to mention at present of this unusu∣al way of drawing light bodies, and with this Experiment I should con∣clude my Notes about Electricity, but that I think it will not be amiss before I take leave of this Subject, to give this Advertisement, That the event of Electrical Experiments is not al∣ways so certain as that of many others, being sometimes much varied by seemingly slight circumstances, and now and then by some that are alto∣gether over-look'd. This Observa∣tion may receive credit from some of Page  35 the particulars above recited (especially con∣cerning the interest of the weather, &c. in Electrical Phaenomena.) But now I shall add, that, not onely there may happen some va∣riations in the success of Trials made with Electrical Bodies, but that it is not so certain as many think, whether some par∣ticular Bodies be or be not Electrical. For the inquisitive Kircherus reckons Crystall among those Gems to whom Nature has denyed the attractive power we are speak∣ing of; and yet I remember not, that, a∣mong all the trials I have made with na∣tive Crystall, I have found any that was destitute of the power he refuses them. Also a late most learned Writer reciting the Electricks, reckon'd up by our indu∣strious Countryman Gilbert, and increasing their number by some observed by him∣self, (to which I shall now add, besides white Saphyrs, and white English Ame∣thysts, the almost Diaphanous spar of Lead Ore) denies Electricity to a couple of tran∣sparent Gems, the Cornelion and the Em∣rald. And I do the less wonder he should do so to the former, because I have my self in vain tried to make any attraction with a piece of Cornelion so large and fair, that 'twas kept for a rarity; and yet with di∣vers other fine Cornelions I have been able to attract some light bodies very manifest∣ly, Page  36 if not briskly; and I usually wear a Cornelian Ring, that is richly enough en∣dowed with Electricity. But as for Em∣ralds, as I thought it strange that Nature should have denied them a Quality she has granted to so many other Diaphanous Gems, and even to Crystal, so I thought the assertion deserved an Examen, upon which I concluded, that at least it does not universally and constantly hold true. I had indeed seen in a Ring a Stone of price and great lustre, which, though green, I found to be, (as I guess'd it would prove) vigorously enough Electrical. But this Experiment, though seemingly con∣clusive, I did not look upon as a fair trial, because the Stone was not a true Emrald, but, which is rare, a green Saphir. And I learned by inquiry of the skillful Jewel∣ler that cut it, that it was so far from ha∣ving the softness of an Emrald, that he found it harder than blew Saphyrs them∣selves, which yet are Gems of great hard∣ness, and by some reputed second to none, but Diamonds. Without therefore con∣cluding any thing from this Experiment, save that, if the assertion I was to examin were true, the want of an Electrical fa∣culty might be thought a Concomitant ra∣ther of the peculiar Texture of the Em∣rald than of its green colour, I proceeded Page  37 to make trial with three or four Emralds, whose being true was not doubted, and found them all somewhat, though not e∣qually, endow'd with Electricity, which I found to be yet more considerable in an Emrald of my own, whose colour was so excellent, that by skilful persons 'twas look'd on as a rarity. And though, by this success of my inquiry, I perceived I could not, as else I might have done, shew the Curious a new way of judging of true and false Emralds, yet the like way may be, though not always certain, yet oftentimes of use, in the estimating whether Dia∣monds be true or counterfeit, especially, if, being set in Rings, the surest way of trying them cannot conveniently be em∣ployed. For whereas Glass, though it have some Electricity, seems, as far as I have observed, to have but a faint one, there are often found Diamonds that have a very vigorous one. And I do not re∣member I met with any Electrick of the same bulk, that was more vigorous than a rough Diamond I have, which is the same that I formerly mentioned to have moved a Needle above three minutes af∣ter I had ceased to chafe it. And this brings into my mind, that it has been ob∣served, that Diamonds draw better whilst rough, than they do after they are cut and Page  38 polish'd; which seeming to contradict what has been observed by others and by us also, that Amber, for instance, attracts more vigorously if the surface be made ve∣ry smooth than otherwise, it induces me to conjecture, that, if this Observation a∣bout Diamonds be true, as some of my trials have now and then inclined me to think it, and if it do not in some cases considerably depend upon the loss of the (Electrical) Substance of the Stone, by its being cut and ground, the Reason may possibly be, that the great rapidness with which the Wheels that serve to cut and polish Diamonds must be mov'd, does ex∣cite a great degree of heat, (which the sense▪ may easily discover) in the Stone, and by that and the strong concussion it makes of its parts, may force it to spend its effluviable matter, if I may so call it, so plentifully, that the Stone may be im∣poverish'd, and perhaps also, on the ac∣count of some little change in its Texture, be rendred lesse disposed to emit those effluvia that are Instruments of Electrical Attraction. But as I willingly leave the matter of Fact to further Trial, so I do the Cause of it, in case it prove true, to farther Inquiry.
FINIS.



Powered by DLXS
To comment or inquire about content, contact eebotcp-info@umich.edu
To report errors, contact DLPS Help

