
 UMDL Texts home 

 Login  

 

Home

Search

Browse

Bookbag

Help

< Return to search results list
Experimenta & observationes physicæ wherein are briefly treated of several subjects relating to natural philosophy in an experimental way : to which is added, a small collection of strange reports
Boyle → , Robert, 1627-1691.
Table of contents | Add to bookbag
highlight hits: on | off
Page  [unnumbered]Page  [unnumbered]
ERRATA.
PAge 6. for omitted, r. emitted, p. 14. l. 9. of left out.
Page  [unnumbered]
ADVERTISEMENT.
Books Published by the Honourable Robert Boyle → , and Printed for John Taylor at the Ship in St. Paul's Church-Yard.
1. A Free Inquiry into the Vulgar∣ly receiv'd Notion of Nature, made in an Essay adress'd to a Friend: In English and Latin.
2. The Martyrdom of Theodora and Dydimus.
3. A Disquisition about the final Causes of Natural things; wherein it is inquir'd, Whether, and (if at all) with what Cau∣tions a Naturalist should admit them? To which are subjoyn'd, by way of Ap∣pendix, some uncommon Observations a∣bout Vitiated Sight.
4. The Christian Virtuoso: Shewing that by being addicted to Experimental Philosophy, a Man is rather assisted, than Indispos'd to be a good Christian; to which are subjoyn'd: 1st. A Discourse about the Distinction that represents some things as above Reason, but not contrary to Reason. 2. The first Chapters of a Discourse, Intituled Greatness of Mind Promoted by Christianity. Printed for J. Taylor at the Ship; and J. Wyat at the Rose in St. Paul's Church-yard.
Page  [unnumbered]
Experimenta & Observationes PHYSICAE: Wherein are briefly Treated of SEVERAL SUBJECTS Relating to Natural Philosophy IN AN EXPERIMENTAL WAY.
To which is added, A small Collection of STRANGE REPORTS.
By the Honourable ROBERT BOYLE → , Fellow of the Royal Society.
LONDON, Printed for Iohn Taylor at the Ship, and Iohn Wyat at the Rose in S. Paul's Church-Yard. MDCXCI.
Page  [unnumbered]Page  [unnumbered]
A Letter that may serve for a Preamble.
To my Learned Friend Mr. H. Oldenburg (Secretary to the Royal Society.)
SIR,
BEing at length come to a Resolution, I have already done something more than barely entred upon that way of Writing, that you and I have more than once Discoursed of to∣gether; and wherein you particularly (tho not you only) among my Learned Friends, have wish'd to see me En∣gaged.
'Tis not, that I am insen∣sible of the Prejudice which the things I deliver are like to sustain, by the disadvan∣tageous Page  [unnumbered] Dress wherein they must appear, in the way of Writing I have pitch'd up∣on; which being for the most part plainly Histori∣cal, and set down in the or∣der wherein, they chanc'd to come to hand, denies most of them, not only the usual Ornaments of other Books, but the allowable Advan∣tages, that Method, elabo∣rate Discourses, neat Hypo∣theses, and subtil Disputes, are permitted to bring even to Philosophical Writings.
But these Considerations were over-sway'd by a sad one, founded upon the (yet continuing) condition I was in, when I was Debating this matter in my Thoughts. For it having pleased God (to whose always most just Page  [unnumbered] Dispensations Men ought entirely to submit) to Af∣flict me with the Stone and the Palsy; as on one side, these, added to a sufficient number of Avocations, scarce permit me any great expectation, of finishing in a short time the Tracts I had made a lesser or great∣er Progress in, according to my first design; so on the other side, my Friends judg∣ing it unfit, that the Ma∣terials provided for these more than begun Treatises, should be quite lost, or kept too long useless, it seemed expedient, that as Opportu∣nity should from time to time serve, I should look over my Memorials, and other scatter'd Papers, to take notice what Experi∣ments Page  [unnumbered] and Observations were to be found in them.
Upon these, and the like inducements, having pick'd up several of my dispersed Papers, some of them Writ∣ten many Years ago, and some of a less ancient date; I began to refer the most part of what I found Histo∣rical in them, together with some few things that did seem necessary not to be se∣ver'd from them, to certain Heads or Titles which I called Chapters; and made them the more numerous, that they might singly be the less Prolix: And about these I must desire your leave to represent some things, by way of Preface.
And first, several of the ensuing Particulars that I Page  [unnumbered] met with among my Pa∣pers, being parts of Essays of other Discourses, and be∣ing for hast Transcribed for the most part Verbatim, as they were couched there; I dare hope for your excuse, if among such Transcripts you now and then meet with things, which, how pertinent soever to the Tracts they first belong'd to, might have been spared as needless, if not some∣times Forein; also, in the new Form the Discourses are now put into; since I could not leave out such unnecessary Clauses (where∣of yet I hope you will not find many) without too much mutilating the cohe∣rence, or obscuring the Page  [unnumbered] sense of what is delivered; and I could not alter them, and adapt others to supply their places without spend∣ing more time, and taking more Pains, than in the con∣dition I am now in, I sup∣pose you would be willing to condemn me to.
Next, I despair not but you will allow me the Li∣berty I have taken, to vary the Bulk and Method of particular Chapters, as my occasions would permit, or the plenty or paucity of Ma∣terials suggested; or the Nature of the thing I treat∣ed of, and the Scope I pro∣posed to my self in Writ∣ing of it, seem'd to require. But sometimes my want of Health and Leisure, and Page  [unnumbered] my desire to hasten to o∣ther subjects, that either pleased me better, or seem'd more considerable, made some of the following Chap∣ters, compared with others, but short; especially, if I were supplyed but with a number of things pertinent to that Subject, by the Pa∣pers I had then in hand, how much soever I may have Written of it in other Papers, which I hope here∣after to be Master of.
And this Advertisement may render you a Reason why to the Title of some of the Chapters I have sub∣joyned the first Section, tho it be not at present follow∣ed with a second.
And, as for my having Page  [unnumbered] imployed very differing Methods in some of the en∣suing. Tracts, I did it with design, as judging such a va∣riety of Method more con∣ducive to my purpose, than Uniformity in it would have been. For, besides that some of the Treatises, vhence these Chapters were taken, did, by the ways wherein they were already Written, oblige me, to ac∣commodate my self to their Method; I thought, that if you should shew these Papers to any, that are very unacquainted (which I have heard you complain, that too many are) with the way of accommodating in some tolerable manner, his En∣quiries and his Writings to Page  [unnumbered] the several Subjects he ap∣plies himself to, he may be somewhat helped, by the differing Examples he may here meet with, to make va∣riations somewhat suitable to the differing Natures of the Subjects he deals with.
But here I must beg you to take notice, That, tho in compliance with this de∣sign, as well as for some o∣ther reasons, I have in seve∣ral of the following Chap∣ters given intimations and hints of things, which I do not there prosecute; and now and then propose some Conjectures and Opinions, whose proof I do not insist on; yet I am not willing you should think, that, however some of those pas∣sages Page  [unnumbered] may be but occasional things, mentioned princi∣pally to excite, and give hints to the inquisitive and sagacious; yet all, or most of them, are of the same kind; and that I thought not on them, but as slightly and transiently as I menti∣oned them; and have no better and other Reasons to alledg for my suspicions or intimations, or even for my conjectures or my opi∣nions, than those you will meet with in Papers hastily drawn up; especially since, I think, I can shew you di∣vers of the things deliver'd in those passages, enlarg'd and render'd at least pro∣bable or practicable in o∣ther Discourses, that for Page  [unnumbered] certain Reasons do not ac∣company these I now send you.
I expect, that you should think it somewhat strange, to find many of the follow∣ing Experiments set down much less circumstantially than those that are menti∣oned in the Physico-Mechani∣cal Experiments touching the Air; in the Continua∣tion of them; in the Hi∣story of Cold, and in some other Books of Mine that you have been pleas'd to peruse. But on this occa∣sion give me leave to repre∣sent to you, that the nature of divers of the former Ex∣periments, especially Chy∣mical ones, and my aims in mentioning them, being Page  [unnumbered] considered, it seem'd not re∣quisite they should be more fully Treated of: And as for others, tho the brevity and dispatch; which divers reasons made me propose to my self, had not forbidden me to amplify; yet I daily feel my leisure, not to say my Life too; so torn piece∣•••• from me, by Sickness, Visits, Business, and inevi∣table Avocations, that I am frequently admonished to hasten the securing of as much as conveniently I can, by dispatching parti∣cular Subjects, and am quite hundred from dwelling so long upon them, as, if I had more Health and Leisure, I should willingly do. To these things perhaps, so fa∣vourable Page  [unnumbered] a Person as Mr. Ol∣denburg will add, that the Characters which Learned Writers, English and Forein, tho divers of them person∣ally unknown to me, have been pleased to give of the diligence and sincerity em∣ployed in setting down thePhysico-Mechanical Experi∣ments, and those of some other Writings of Mine, may permit me to hope, that it will be thought, that, after having been divers years vers'd in making Try∣als and Experiments, I have made them with some care and wariness, and mention∣ed them faithfully, where I have not done it amply; upon hopes it may be taken in good part from a Person Page  [unnumbered] in my present condition, that was never a Professor of Philosophy, nor so much as a Gown-man; to have made shift to make the Ex∣periments and Observations he communicates, and set them down truly and can∣didly, without fraudulently concealing any part of them, for fear they should make against him. And tho perhaps you will easily be∣lieve, that in divers of the Experiments which I have but briefly mention'd, I have been as diligent an Observer of Circumstances, as I was wont to be when I made those, which have had the luck to be taken notice of for being fully related; and tho it may be also, that Page  [unnumbered] some Scruples or Objections, which my brevity may in part occasion, were not un∣foreseen by me, and might have been avoided by a more copious and diffus'd way of Writing; yet I pur∣posely decline such a way of delivering things, not on∣ly for the reasons above mention'd; and because I suppose them that may per∣use these Papers, to be ac∣quainted with my former∣ly Published Writings, and to have either from them, or otherwise, understood the way of making such Experiments as mine; but also, because, tho I wanted Time and Health, much less than I do, I should not think it fit too much to prevent Page  [unnumbered] the Industry of others about the Tryals I mention; and reap the Field so clean, as not to leave them, not only store of Ears to Glean, but some corners of standing Corn. I have therefore here and there purposely omit∣ted, both, some not absolute∣ly necessary Practical Di∣rections about making of Tryals, that might prevent such Scruples or Objections, as have the Grounds of an∣swering them clearly de∣liver'd in my Printed Books; and several, not only lesser Circumstances, but conside∣rablePhaenomena, and obvi∣ous Applications, that may probably occur to others, as they did to me in making the Tryals and Reflecting on them.
Page  [unnumbered]
Advertisements about the Dispositi∣on of the following Treatise.
YOƲ will quickly discern that the fol∣lowing Chapters could not be intended for compleat Tracts, about the Subjects handl'd in them. And indeed they were intended but for such Memoirs about the Various particu∣lar Subjects they Treat of, as may be service∣able to the Solid Natural History that has been nobly design'd and is still prosecuted, by the Royal Society. Wherefore since (at least in our Age) no Writer that I know of, has so early and so well, both urg'd the necessity of Natural History, and promoted divers Parts of it by Precepts and Specimens, as the il∣lustrious Lord Verulam; I shall not scruple in the way or manner of Writing these short Collections of mine, to make use somewhat frequently of his Authority and Examples; but without Confining my self to either.
I. Agreeably to this Advertisement you will find, that some of the Particulars that the following Treatise consists of, are single and as it were, Independent ones; upon which account they resemble those which in the Ve∣rulamian Sylva, or Natural History, are call'd Experiments Solitary: And have for that reason induc'd me to give that Title Page  [unnumbered] to each of the several Chapters that are made up of them.
II. Another sort of Chapters there is, wherein divers Experiments and Observations, all of them relating to the same Subject or Purpose, are set down together. These if they were rang'd and sorted in order to distinct Theories, I should call, in imitation of the mention'd Author, Experiments in Con∣sort. But my backwardness to frame Theo∣ries has made me chuse to forbear as yet to methodize them, and therefore has made me think fit to call them onlyvarious Experi∣ments and Observations about this or that Subject (which they belong to.)
III. My hast, tho not that only, induc'd me to make one sort of Chapters more, that partly agrees with, and partly differs from each of the two that I come from mentioning: For in every one of these Chapters, there are two or three, if not more, single or Solitary Experiments; and there are also others that have some kind of Connexion among them∣selves, as being referable to the same Subject or Purpose. On that score the Title that is given to each of the Chapters of this Third sort, is that of Miscellaneous Experiments; and sometimes (but seldomer) of Promiscuous Ones. And all the Particulars that I refer to the three foremention'd Heads, are cast in∣to Chapters, wherein the several kinds are Page  [unnumbered] distinguish'd only by their Titles, or not.
IV. There is one Advertisement that re∣gards all the sorts of Particulars that are re∣fer'd to the foremention'd Chapters, which is, that I have usually comprehended Observati∣ons, as well as Tryals, nuder the Title of Ex∣periments; which I have done, not only upon the Authority, and in following the Exam∣ple of our Judicious Chancellor (as is every where obvious in his Sylva Sylvarum) but for other reasons too. For both the sorts of Particulars may pass for matters of Fact, and so are Historical, taking the word in a lax sense, and the imploying it in that sense, makes the Articles or Passages, whereof the Chap∣ters and other parts of our Collection consists, much more commodious for References and Citations.
V. Besides the three foremention'd kinds of Chapters, you will meet in the ensuing Trea∣tise with another sort of Writings, whereof some are almost entire, and others Fragments of larger Discourses. In neither of these, I did confine my self so much to matters of Fact, as in those Chapters that consist of Experiments and Observations; but took the liberty, as occasion requir'd, to inlarge in Discourses, and sometimes to Cite such pas∣sages out of other Mens Writings, as I judg'd I could make some pertinent Application or use of, perhaps unthought of by the Author. Page  [unnumbered] And these Papers being most, if not all of them Written in a more free and discursive way, I thought fit to separate them from the Sets of Collections that are almost merely Hi∣storical; and accordingly I have not styl'd themChapters, but Titles; and have for∣born to assign them, as I did the others, Or∣dinal Numbers; which I desire likewise you would not prefix to any of them, because I am not yet resolv'd how I shall dispose of them, either by supplying what is wanting to finish any one, or more of them, or by taking to pieces, and imploying those pieces as Materials for other Tracts.
VI. Perhaps I shall not be thought to need Pardon, if to comply with their Curiosity, who affect most those Experiments, that are either uncommon, or teach them to do or per∣form something useful or pretty; I sometimes prefix a Title declaring what it treats of, to a particular Experiment (or Observation,) which for its Importance, Novelty, or Ʋse∣fulness (Theorical or Practical) may deserve to bedistinguish't; since by this means such Particulars may be the better imprest on the memory, to gratifie those, whose nicety or want of leisure, may make them well pleas'd by a transient view of the Titles we speak of, to find such Passages as they chiefly look'd for, with less trouble than that of perusing an Index.
Page  [unnumbered] VII. Among the Experiments our Collecti∣on consists of, there is here and there one, to which it was thought fit to add something, either by way of Explication, or of Illustrati∣on, or of Confirmation, or of Answer to Ob∣jections, or of Theorical Reflection, or of Practical Application, &c. And these Supple∣ments or Additions it was thought fit to call sometimes Annotations, but oftner Scholiums, because that Term is freely us'd in a very comprehensive Sense by Mathematical Writers. But tho I readily acknowledg that this Term has been chiefly imploy'd by Mathematicians, yet the use of it has not been so confin'd to them, but that good Authors in other parts of Learning have not scrupl'd to imploy it, as may appear by the Scholiums that some Learned Physicians have Written upon Hol∣lerius, an eminent Person of their Profes∣sion; as also by the Example of the famous and Experienc'd Forestus, who has not sel∣dom subjoin'd Scholiums, even to his own Medicinal Observations.
VIII. The mention of these Scholia prompts me to tell you, I had almost forgotten, but yet must not leave unmention'd, that I thought fit now and then to premise to Sets of Experiments, and sometimes (tho more seldom) to a singleObservation a short Preamble by way of Introduction, which may often excuse the need of subjoyning a Scholium; and may be warranted by the Example of the LordPage  [unnumbered] Verulam in his Centuries, wherein he often inserts such short Preambles, as things fitted to give light to the Experiments they belong to, and to give some Advertisement both of the Nature and Importance of the Subject, and of the Scope of the Writer, or of other useful circumstances.
IX. If among my own Experiments, namely, those that I have made or seen, I have sometimes inserted Experiments or Ob∣servations that are not so: I have not done it without reason, and am authoris'd in that Practice, by frequent Examples afforded me by the first, if not only Author that I know of, that gave us a Set of Precepts of well writing Natural History, our often cited Verulam, whose Centuries do in great part consist of borrow'd Experiments andObservations; without which, he was sensible that his Sylva must be of too narrow a compass, or too thin∣ly stock't with Plants, especially with Trees. And indeed 'tis not to be expected, that, as the Silk-worm draws her whole Mansion alto∣gether out of her own Bowels, so a single man should be able to write a Natural History out of his own Experiments and Thoughts. And he that will strictly confine himself to those, will be often reduc'd to omit things very per∣tinent, if not necessary, to his Subject, which is of practice studiously declin'd by me, who prefer the Readers Ʋtility, to the ambition'd Page  [unnumbered] Glory of being thought to borrow nothing from any Body. And I can add in my Defence, at least my Excuse, that I have made use but of a small part of the Liberty allow'd me by the Example of so great a Guide in the way of Writing Natural History. For I have very much seldomer than he, employ'd the Tryals of others; and have yet seldomer mention'd unverifi'd Reports or vulgar Tra∣ditions, being careful that the Bulk of the Matters of Fact I deliver, should consist of things, whereof I was my self an Actor, or an Eye witness; and that the comparatively few borrow'd Experiments that I added, (that I might not deprive my Reader of some things very pertinent and useful to my Subject) were receiv'd from Persons of very good credit; besides that I do not only frequently give sufficient Intimation in the Experiment or Observation its self, but oftentimes by plac∣ing the Letter C in the Margent, do give notice; nay, and sometimes to a whole Set, prefix the Title of Communicated Experi∣ments or Observations.
X. I have nothing more to give you notice of here, save that, where∣as you will find that I Write but on one side of the Leaves, whereof this Book*consists: I did so for two Reasons. The First, That in case I Page  [unnumbered] should have occasion to imploy any of these Ex∣periments in other Treatises, for which I am more concern'd than for this Rhapsody, I might have room to Substitute, if it should be thought fit, one or more of my later Experiments in its place. And Secondly, That I might have room, if I can get leisure, to Write Annota∣tions, or make Reflections, or Illustrations, or Corrections, or in a word, such Additi∣tions and Alterations of particular Ex∣periments and Passages, as they shall be thought to deserve or need.
I am sensible that this Preamble, increas'd by the Advertisements that 'twas thought ne∣cessary to annex to it, is of a length that may seem disproportionate to the Book or Tract 'tis prefixt to. But I may in excuse of this represent to you, that the Bundle of Writings you now receive, is but a part of the Book; to which, if God vouchsafe me Health and Lei∣sure, this Preface inlarg'd by its Appendix, is design'd for an Introduction. And in that case 'tis hop'd that these Preliminaries, as many as they are, will not be thought Imper∣tinent, or needlesly prolix.
Page  1
Experimenta & Observationes PHYSICAE. TOME I.
CHAP. I.
CONTAINING Chymico-Magnetical Expe∣riments and Observations.
THE Loadstone, Pyrophi∣lus, is so admirable a Body, and its Useful∣ness to Mankind is al∣ready so great, without deny∣ing us hopes of farther Improv∣ments; Page  2 that I think we must want Curiosity or Gratitude, if we neglect either to take notice of any Experienc'd Phoenomena that directly relate to so abstruse a Subject, or, by consigning them to Paper, to preserve them from Oblivion. 'Tis chiefly by this Consideration, Pyrophilus, that I am induc'd to mention to you the following Experiments and Obser∣vations, made most of them by the help of the Fire. For, tho some of them may seem but slight; yet they may not prove unuseful, towards discovering the Nature of a Body so strange and singular, that, for ought is yet manifest, any true Magnetical Phoenomena may somewhat conduce to the knowledg of it, And I was the rather induc'd to make Tryals and Observations of this Kind, because most of them are such as I have not met with in Authors. And the few that remain, I have not found sufficiently taken notice Page  3 of there; Philosophers and Ma∣thematicians ayming chiefly, in their Magnetical Writings, to pro∣secute and apply the Attractive and Directive, and perhaps the Inclinatory, faculty of the Load∣stone. Whereas, throwing into another Paper, what I Observ'd, of that kind, I did in the present Inquiry mainly intend to make the Loadstone rather the Object than the Instrument of my Tryals: and handling chiefly the very Substance of the Stone, endea∣vour not so much to Advance or Apply its Faculties, as to Weak∣en and Destroy them, tho in or∣der to the better knowing of them. Having therefore procured a con∣siderable number of, for the most part naked (or uncapt) Load∣stones, most of them Course, but of differing Sizes, Shapes, Colours, and Countries; I made upon them several Tryals, some of which I should immediately proceed to give you a brief Account of, but Page  4 that 'twill be proper to premise this short Advertisement: That, I would not have the Title of these Experiments make you ex∣pect, that the Fire should be a main Agent in every one of them, since to preserve some few of them, I refer them hither, tho an actual Fire was not Imploy'd to make them: Since the common Rule that a potiori parte fit denominatio, will suffice to Warrant, or at least excuse, my giving to this small Collection the Title of Chymico∣Magnetical Experiments; because the greatest part were perform'd by the help of the Fire, or Bodies Chymically prepar'd by the Ap∣plication of it. And because 'tis usual with the best Writers about Magnetism, to reckon Steel and Iron among Magnetical Bodies; I shall not scruple to deliver in this Paper some Experiments, made by the help of the Fire upon those Subjects; with reference never∣the less to Magnetism.
Page  5
EXPERIMENT I.
Having Ignited several Load∣stones, and removed them from the Fire till they grew Cold a∣gain, I found a great disparity in the visible substance whereof they consisted, and the manifest struct∣ure of the gross parts that made them up. Forsome Stones upon Refrigeration, either fell asunder of themselves, or grew very Brit∣tle; when as others still continu∣ed in their entireness: Some of them being broken look'd not un∣like Iron-Ore, or Stones which I have gather'd near Iron-Mynes in Kent; others being broken, after Refrigeration appear'd to consist of Plates or Flakes of several Co∣lours, and lying Parallel to one another: And others again, which as I remember were English ones, did neither appear to be compos'd of any such Flakes, nor had their dark Colours much, if at all Page  6 chang'd by the operation of the Fire, nor did cease to be Solid Bodies.
EXPERIMENT II.
We could not upon the Burn∣ing of several small Loadstones one after another, discern any such blew sulphureous Flame as Porta in his * Natural Magick re∣lates himself to have seen, and judges to have been as it were the Soul of the Loadstone, upon whose recess he says, it lost its Magne∣tick Faculty, which is most com∣monly true as to any considerable de∣gree of the Coitive or Attractive Power, but not of the Directive Faculty or Vertue. But it may be thatPorta mistook the small Flame, which is often omitted even by well-kindled and glowing Charcoales, (on which sort his Loadstone was placed) especially when a little blowen upon, for the Page  7 exhaling Soul of the Loadstone; or else, to be civil to him, we may suppose, that, His Stone was more rich in Unctuous Moisture than Others are wont to be; and if we had had by us a very ex∣act pair of Scales, we should have endeavoured to have by them discovered, * whether the Fire do deprive Loadstones of any ponde∣rable parts.
EXPERIMENT III.
The Solidity of some English Loadstones, made me think it fit, tho I look'd upon them as a kind of Iron-Ore, to try whether they could not be brought to strike Fire. And accordingly, having made divers Collisions be∣twixt a rough peice, and the steel of a Tinder Box; I found that with much ado it was possible to obtain some Sparks, (tho they seem'd but small ones:) But hav∣ing Page  8 taken a large peice of smooth Loadstone, I found that, by strik∣ing it somewhat briskly, with the edge of a steel'd Hammer, we were able to produce good store of Sparks, and some of them of a surprizing bigness; for they were judged to exceed the size of those that are usually afforded by common Flints.
EXPERIMENT IV.
For certain Reasons I thought fit to make a further Tryal, be∣ing desirous to satisfie my self, whether it were not possible, to make Loadstones afford Fire with∣out the help of Iron or Steel. And being willing to comply with this Curiosity, I made choice of two solid peices of Loadstone, that were cut almost into the form of Cubes; and found that many Collisions being made between them, especially at the edges; there were produced from Time Page  9 to Time, (tho not frequently,) some Sparks of Fire, tho neither so numerous, nor so great or vivid, as those of the foregoing Experiment wherein the Steel was employ'd.
EXPERIMENT V.
I have (elsewhere) formerly related, that if an Oblong Load∣stone made glowing hot, be re∣frigerated Perpendicularly, the lower extream will thereby be∣come its Northern Pole. And I shall now add, that yet if such a Loadstone be refrigerated Per∣pendicularly, not upon an ordi∣nary Terrestrial Body, but upon the Northern extream of a much stronger Loadstone; in such case, this debilitated Stone will receive its Impressions, as if it were an Iron, and its lower extream will not be, as before, by the Magne∣tick Effluvia of the Earth, made its Northern Pole; but it will be Page  10 contrariwise animated by the Pole of the Loadstone, on which 'tis cool'd; and according to the Laws Magnetical, the lower ex∣tream of it, will not be its Nor∣thern, but its Southern Pole, nim∣bly attracting the North end of an excited and Aequilibrated Needle.
EXPERIMENT VI.
By the forementioned way of Refrigeration I also found, that a Disanimated Loadstone (if I may so speak) may be restored, to some degree of its Attractive Vertue; for I try'd that a small Loadstone, which after its being made red hot in the Fire, and cool'd Perpendicularly upon the Ground, was not able to take up a fragment of a Needle; being again heated, and not only cool'd upon the Pole of a strong Load∣stone, but suffered to rest on it a while after, was soon grown vi∣gorous Page  11 enough, to take up what formerly it could not move.
EXPERIMENT VII.
I further observ'd, that tho a Loadstone that had pass'd the Fire, had not, by being immedi∣ately before made red hot, had its Body open'd and fitted to take in plentifully the Magnetical Streams; yet it would, like a wire of Iron, acquire a new Ver∣ticity from the vigorous Load∣stone; but not be in many Hours so vigorously impregnated with Magnetick vertue, if it were ap∣plied cold to the Pole of the Animating Loadstone; as it would in a very short time, if being glowing hot it were refrigerated thereupon.
N. B. It has been observ'd, that if a Loadstone be made red hot in the Fire, it will scarce retain any sensible Attractive vertue, Page  12 save that it will be able, by being endowed with a Magnetism from the Earth, to drive away that Pole of a Needle well poys'd, which agrees in Denomination with that Pole of the Loadstone, which is applied to it. But I de∣sire that it may be remembred, that I intimated that this is not strictly and universally true; for in some of our English Loadstones, it has been observ'd, that Ignition does not only leave them capable of a Directive Vertue, but leaves them also a considerable Attra∣ctive power, so that they will su∣stain a good weight of Steel (as will appear hereafter.)
EXPERIMENT VIII.
We took three English Load∣stones that appeared to be of a very compact Substance; two of them very small, as not being of near half an Inch in length; the other much greater, being Page  13 about an Inch long, and of a con∣siderable breadth, but yet of small thickness: These we made red hot in a Fire of well kindled Charcoal, and being thorowly Ignited, removed them one after another, and hastily set each of them upon a Plate of Silver (for neither Wood nor Iron would have been convenient) and apply∣ing the Loadstone (Capp'd) to each of them, whilst it was yet red hot; it seem'd manifest enough, not only, that whilst it was in that state, the Stone had not so strong an Operation on it, as if it were not red hot: But, which is re∣markable, when it ceas'd to ap∣pear Ignited, but yet was intensly hot, (so that it was readily able to burn his Fingers that should offer to take it up between them) the armed Loadstone had a more powerful Operation on it, by way of what they call Attraction and Sustentation (not only, as I said, than it had, whilst the Ignited Page  14 Stone conspicuously retain'd the colour Fire, but) than it had, after the same Stone was grown cold.
EXPERIMENT IX.
This Experiment was reite∣rated with the two smaller Magnets and the greater, with the like success: And when the Magnets were grown cold, they did notwithstanding their having been twice ignited, discover some little Magnetism, if apply'd to the end of a well-excited Mag∣netick Needle, nicely poys'd up∣on the point of an ordinary Needle [or brass Pin] (on which its Center of Gravity lean'd.) And I found that the bigger of the three forementioned Load∣stones, after the first, if not also after the second Ignition; did not only move the Magnetick Needle more briskly than one would have expected, but, (which Page  15 may seem strange) being thrust into filings of Mars, and then taken out, it carried up with it and sustained a considerable Number of them. Whence we may conclude, that in some Load∣stones of a very solid Constituti∣on, such as this was; the Mag∣netical vertue is more Radicated (if I may so speak) or Permanent, than in the generality of other Magneticks: This Stone being the first wherein I observ'd, after I had thorowly Ignited it, any At∣tractive vertue able to take up Filings of Iron.
EXPERIMENT X.
On occasion of these Tryals I made another, which tho to some it may seem but slight, I thought the more worthy to be made, because I remember not to have read or heard of it be∣fore; we took then, the same Loadstone that we employ'd about Page  16 the last Experiment, and having again made it red hot, in the Fire, suffered it not to cool lei∣surely in the Air, as before, but quenched it, in a Bason of cold Water; intending thereby to make a double variation of the Expe∣riment, first, by cooling it Hasti∣ly, and as it were Abruptly; and next by cooling it not in the Air, but in a Fluid some hundreds of times more Dense or Ponderous than the Air. The Event of the Tryal was, that, upon the Im∣mersion of the red hot Stone, there fell off some flaky matter, as if it had been Scales of Mars; and the Stone, when cold, would not take up any filings of Iron, as before it did many; so that it appear'd to have lost much of the Vertue it so lately had, tho it re∣tain'd the Power to move a well∣poys'd Needle, if it were held near to either side of the point of it.
Page  17
EXPERIMENT XI.
A black Oblong Loadstone, of a Homogeneous Substance, and weighing near three Drams, hav∣ing been in a Fire of well-kindled Charcoals, Ignited, and continu∣ed so for some Minutes, of an Hour; being weighed again as soon as it was cool'd, was found to have lost about ⅝ of a Grain of its first Weight, and much of the blackness of its Colour.
Tho the Affinity between the Loadstone and Iron, might make one expect that the Fire might have a like Operation upon this Stone, and that out of which Iron is commonly melted, both be∣ing indeed Iron-Oars; yet for some Reasons that I cannot now stay to mention, I was induc'd to think, that the Effect of Ignition upon those two Bodies might be very differing, as I conceive their Internal and unseen Texture to Page  18 be. And therefore I made the following Experiment.
A Lump of Iron Oar, which look'd almost like a white Stone, rather than a common Oar, and was about the bigness of two Eggs; being apply'd, in several of its parts, to an excited Needle, did not appear to move it mani∣festly. But being afterwards made glowing Hot, and kept so for a while, and then Refrigerated; it did in those parts, which seem'd by their newly acquir'd Colour to abound with Metalline Corpuscles; it did, I say, mani∣festly Attract the North end of the Needle. And this was try∣ed, both with a Needle of our own touching, and by the Ma∣riners Needle of a Sun-Dyal; whose Flower-de-Luce, the burnt Oar did manifestly draw.
Page  19
EXPERIMENT XII.
To confirm the former Ob∣servation, and also what I else∣where gave notice of, That divers Bodies are of a Magnetical Na∣ture or have in them some parts that are so, which yet are not vul∣garly believ'd to be referable to that sort of Bodies; I shall sub∣joyn the following Experiment.
A Brick that had not been us'd, was saw'd long ways into two equal pieces, and each of these (one at one time, and ano∣ther at another) was heated red hot in the Fire for a pretty while, and afterwards suffer'd to cool North and South: And, as I ex∣pected, it thereby acquired a Magnetical Verticity; and with that end that in cooling respected the South, did a little, tho but faintly, draw the Flower de Luce (which pointed out the North) of the Mariner's Needle; and with Page  20 the other end, did somewhat more vigorously drive the Flower de Luce away, and a little attract the other Extream of the Needle.
EXPERIMENT XIII.
We took a [black] Loadstone, and having by degrees beaten it small, without suffering it to touch any Iron or Steel Vesiel or Instrument, [which because of the hardness of the Stone, was very troublesome to do;] we set aside the grosser Grains for other uses, and upon some of the finer Powder we pour'd the Spirit of common Salt, which had at first a sensible Operation upon it, by producing foetid Fumes, and mak∣ing a kind of Ebullition, as that Menstruun is wont to do upon fil∣ings of Iron or Steel. But never∣theless, being kept a Night or two in Digestion, it drew a high Tin∣cture; and tho this was not at all, like the Solutions of Mars in Spi∣rit Page  21 of Salt, Green, but of a Yel∣lowish Brown, not very remote from Redness: Yet a little of it being dropt into a fresh and suffi∣ciently coloured Infusion of Galls, turned it presently into an Inky Substance, which in some Positions appear'd blewish, as a Tincture or light Solution of Mars would have done.. I shall only add, about the Solution of Loadstone, that hav∣ing carefully made it with a good Aqua regia, obtain'd a Solution, some of which you may yet com∣mand a sight of, that by some Vir∣tuosi to whom I shew'd it, was thought either a fine Solution of Gold, or little, if at all, inferior to it in kind or Richness of Colour. I chose to employ the Spirit of Salt, rather than that of Nitre or Aqua Fortis, in this Experiment; because I found the first named Liquor to dissolve Iron very well, if not better, tho less furiously, than Aqua Fortis it self; and also, because I could by this means bet∣ter Page  22 judge of the Tincture of its Colour; having formerly found by Tryal, that Spirit of Salt makes a Green Solution of Mars; but Aqua Fortis or Spirit of Nitre, a Reddish one. And it was to judge of the Tincture of the Loadstone, as well as for another purpose, that I was so careful to keep the Stone from touching Iron, when it was pulverising; least by the Hardness of it, and the Sharpness of its Angles, it should grate off some parts of the Metal, and so alter the Solution; for want of which Caution, I have known some Experiments about Artificial Gems to miscarry; the Brass Mor∣ter wherein the hard Ingredients were beaten, having communica∣ted some Particles to them, that alter'd the Colour which the Masse after Vitrification would otherwise have been of.
Page  23
EXPERIMENT XIV.
Some Parts of the foregoing Experiment may be confirm'd by that which follows.
I caus'd a weak Loadstone to be heated red hot, to make it the more easie to be powder'd, and having caus'd it to be beaten very fine, I digested good Spirit of Salt upon it. (I afterwards found that ordinary Spirit would serve the turn) This in a few Hours ac∣quir'd a Tincture not greenish, but almost like that of a troubled So∣lution of Gold. It strongly relish'd of Iron, and a little of it being dropp'd into Infusion of Galls, it turn'd it immediately into an Inky Liquor; part of this Solution be∣ing gently Evaporate•, grew thick like an Extract, but did not seem dispos'd to shoot into Chry∣stals; yet another part of it did precipitate with Salt of Tartar, much like a Solution of Vitriol; Page  24 and another with Spirit of fermen∣ted Urine gave a plentiful, but yellowish red, Praecipitate.
EXPERIMENT XV.
Meeting among my loose Notes, with one that may serve both for a Variation and Con∣firmation of what has been above delivered in the Experi∣ments; it seem'd not improper to annex a Transcript of it.
A red Mineral, whose Consi∣stence was between Stony and Earthy, was by me judg'd to be a kind of Iron Oar, tho having powder'd some of it, I could not find that a good Loadstone would attract any part of it: Therefore, to satisfie my self, and to confirm D. B's Observation; about the Vertue of Linseed Oyl, I caus'd this red Powder, wetted with that Liquor, to be kept about two Hours Ignited in a Crucible; by which means it was turn'd black∣ish. Page  25 This dark colour'd Powder was taken out, and suffer'd to cool, and then would readily ad∣here to the same Loadstone, al∣most as if they had been a heap of filings of Iron. But the Ope∣ration of the Fire perhaps contri∣buted, as much (or more) as the Linseed Oyl, to this Change. For a parcel of the red Powder being kept Ignited in a Crucible, tho without the Liquor, did after∣wards appear Magnetical.
After having said thus much of the most useful of uncommon Stones, the Magnet: It will not, I presume, be thought incongru∣ous to subjoin some Remarks a∣bout the most precious of them that are known among us, viz. Diamonds; which will be done in the next Chapter.
Page  26
CHAP. II.
CONTAINING Various Observations about DIAMONDS.
DIamonds being generally e∣steem'd the most Noble and Precious of Gems, and even of Inanimate Bodies here below, (for of Carbuncles, the very Existence is disputed;) the Opportunity I had of being one of the Commit∣tee or Directors of the English East-India Company, (whereto the desire of Knowledge, not Profit, drew me) allow'd me in some measure to gratifie my Curiosity about them, by adding to some Observations of my own, the An∣swers Page  27 I had to the questions, I propounded to some East-India Merchants and Jewellers, that had Opportunity to deal much with those Gems. Part of what I had learn'd about them, I committed from time to time to some Papers, which were the main things that supply'd me with the following Particulars.
These Gems, (to add that upon the by,) may the rather deserve our Curiosity, because the Com∣merce they help to maintain be∣tween the Western and Eastern parts of the World, is very con∣siderable. For as small as their Bulk is, their Properties and Mens Opinion, do so much recommend them, that I remember one of the most famous and intelligent Mer∣chants of this Nation, (who has been Governor of more than one Trading Company in it,) being enquir'd of by me about the value of the Diamond Trade; he an∣swer'd me, That according to his Page  28 well-grounded Estimate, there came from the East-Indies into Europe, one year with another, to the value of about 350000 Sterl. of which about 100000 l. came into England; which at present, because of the prudent Indulgence of the Government, and of the East-India Company, is become the Mart of Diamonds.
I. To prove the great hardness of Diamonds, even in comparison of other Bodies, that are thought wonderfully hard, a famous Ar∣tist for cutting of Diamonds, in return to some questions I put him, affirm'd to me, that he could not either Cut or Polish Diamonds with any thing but with Diamonds. And he further answered me, that if he should employ so rough a way, and such forcible Engines to cut Rubies or any other Stones, as he does to cut Diamonds, it would presently break them in pieces; which the Inspection of his Engine made very probable to me.
Page  29 II. A very skilful Cutter and Polisher of Diamonds (Mr. L.) being demanded by me, whether he found that all sorts of Dia∣monds were of equal Hardness, told me, that having dealt in Dia∣monds near twenty years in Am∣sterdam, and divers years in En∣gland, he perceiv'd that there are of later years, brought over worse and worse sorts of Diamonds; so that he judges those of the old Rock (as he calls them) either to be quite spent in the Indies them∣selves, or at least to be seldom or never brought over to us. And he finds several of recent Diamonds, so soft and brittle in comparison of those of the old Rock, that he is oftentimes afraid, or unwilling to meddle with them, least he should spoil them in the Cutting or Po∣lishing.
III. Notwithstanding the (late∣ly mention'd) wonderful Hardness of Diamonds, there is no Truth in the Tradition, as generally as Page  30 'tis receiv'd, that represents Dia∣monds as uncapable of being broken by any External force, unless they be soften'd by being steep'd in the Blood of a Goat. For this odd Assertion, I find to be con∣tradicted by frequent practice of Diamond Cutters: And particu∣larly having enquir'd of one of them, to whom abundance of those Gems are brought to be fitted for the Jeweller and Goldsmith, he assur'd me, That he makes much of his Powder to Polish Diamonds with, only, by beating board Dia∣monds (as they call them) in a Steel or Iron Morter, and that he has that way made with ease, some hundreds of Carrats of Diamond Dust.
IV. 'Tis an Opinion receiv'd a∣mong many that deal in Gems, that as Diamonds are the hardest of Bodies, so the same Compactness, and their great Solidity, gives them also a proportionable Gravity, and makes them extreamly weighty, Page  31 in reference to their Bulk: And I saw in the Hands of a Virtuoso, a Book (that I could not procure) not long since put out by a French Jeweller, who as he affirms, has dealt very much in Diamonds; wherein the Author asserts, the great Ponderosity of these Stones, in comparison of other Bodies. But this Opinion agrees very little with the following Experiment, that I find among others, that I try'd about Gems, Register'd to this purpose.
A rough Diamond somewhat dark within, did in a pair of Scales that would turn either way with the 32th part of a Grain, weigh 8 Grains, and eight Sixteenths. This Stone being with care weigh'd in Water, according to the Rules of the Hydrostaticks; its weight appear'd to be to that of an equal Bulk of that Liquor, as 2 11/23 to 1. So that, as far as can be judg'd by this Tryal, even a Diamond weighs not full thrice as much as Water.
Page  32 V. A famous and experienc'd Cutter of Diamonds, being ask'd by me, whether he did not find some rough Diamonds heavier than others of the same bigness, told me, that he did, especially if some of them were Cloudy or foul: Insomuch that shewing me a Diamond that seem'd to be about the bigness of two ordinary Pease or less, he affirm'd, That he some∣times found in Diamonds of that bigness, compar'd together about a Carrat (or four Grains) diffe∣rence in point of weight.
VI. The shape or figure of Dia∣monds is not so easie to be securely determin'd. For those that are seen in Rings and other Jewels, having been by way of Preparation cut and polish'd, have chang'd their natural Figures for that which the Artificer thought fit to give them. And rough Diamonds themselves (which are not obviously met with) do oftentimes come to our Hands broken, tho unwillingly, by the Page  33 Diggers. And thereby unfit to acquaint us with their genuine Shape, which we may also miss of being able to discover, on account of the Accidents that the matter they consisted of was subject to, at their formation in the Mine. For to omit other Proofs, having had a Parcel of between 100 and 150 (if I misremember not the Number,) put into my Hands at one time in the East-India House to gratifie my Curiosity, I found very few of them compleatly shap'd; but most of them broken, and of very irregular Figures, like those of so much Gravel taken up at adventures upon the Sea-shore. But some few I saw that were pret∣ty regularly figur'd, which proba∣bly were not much hinder'd from shooting freely in the Wombs or Cavities, wherein they were Coa∣gulated or Concreted. And these seem'd to consist, in my opinion, of several Triangular Surfaces that were terminated in, or compos'd, Page  34 diverse solid Angles. And one rough Diamond I had of my own, wherein this Shape was more con∣spicuous than I remember to have seen in any other. Besides having enquir'd of a very experienc'd Ar∣tificer, who dealt much in fitting these Gems for the Goldsmiths use, whether he found rough Diamonds to be of any constant Figure, and if he did, what that Figure was? He answer'd me, That he always found those that had any constant, (or as he meant, regular) Figure, to be in his own Expression six corner'd.
VII. Diamonds have in them a Grain (or a determinate tendency of their Fibres, or rather of the thin Plates they are made up. of,) as well as Wood, and may with case enough be split along the Grain, tho not against it; as I have seen a very large Diamond that was cut according to the Grain into three pieces, whereof the middlemost, tho large and a∣bout Page  35 the thickness of a Shilling, was of an even thickness, and ex∣actly flat on both sides. I have my self a Diamond-Ring, whose Stone I would not have polish'd, but caus'd it to be set rough as Nature produc'd it, because in that state the Grain is manifest to the naked Eye, and much more to a Glass moderately magnifying the several Plates it consists of, having their Edges distinguishable like those of a Book a little open'd. A Cutter of these Gems that has had store of them to practise his skill on, answer'd me, That one good blow may split even great Dia∣monds, if it be given, as they speak, with the Grain; but against the Grain, he affirm'd to me, as dex∣terous and expert an Artificer as he is, that he is not able so much as to Cut or Polish them.
VIII. The common Colour of Diamond being generally enough known by sight, 'tis not needful, as it would not be to describe it by Page  36 Words; but the most usual Colour of these Gems is not the only, of which they may sometimes be found. A great Traveller into the Eastern parts of the World assur'd me, That he had seen some of them that were of a pale blewish Co∣lour: That famous French Jewel∣ler as well as Traveller, Monsieur Tavernier, gives an account of a fair Diamond that he had of a very red colour; and that great. Ornament of our English Court the D. of R. told me, that she was Mistress of a fair one, which tho not of a Ruby, was of a red Co∣lour, but not having it at Hand, she could not then shew it me: A Relation of mine, in the same Court, used to wear a Diamond Ring; which tho the Stone was not great, he valu'd at a hundred Pound, because its Colour was of so fine a Golden yellow, that I I should have taken it for an ex∣cellent Topaz, but that he had satisfi'd me 'twas a Diamond to Page  37 which agreed its great hardness, which gave an uncommon Luster. And I remember, that Surveying attentively a parcel of rough Dia∣monds newly brought from the East-Indies, I perceiv'd among them, besides several lighter va∣riations of Colour. One Stone that was all Green, and that to such a degree, that I doubted not that if it were polish'd land set, it might pass for an excellent E∣merald; and I should have sus∣pected this Gem to have been really of that kind, but that I found it among Diamonds that belong'd to Merchants too Skilful in those Gems to be impos'd up∣on; and which was more, the Stone being yet rough and un∣cut, I found it plainly to have the proper shape of a Diamond.
IX. At the late return of the Ships from India, being present at the delivery of the Diamonds to the Owners, I observ'd one belong∣ing to a Dutch Merchant whose Page  38 Father was a Cutter of Diamonds, and bred him to the same Trade. The Diamond came from the King of Cholconda, it was shaped (like mine) with fix Triangular sides, which yet were neither regularly figured nor truly flat, some of them being a little Convex, and one of them having a manifest and odly-figured Cavity in it. But the Diamond being fair and flawless, and so thick, that the Merchant told me it would be too deep for one Ring, and that therefore he meant to split it into two. I had it weigh'd, and found it to amount to ten Charats (or 40 Grains). I could easily perceive the Grain of this Diamond, which the Mer∣chant also acknowledged; who answer'd me, that he had never seen in Diamonds any Heteroge∣neous mixture inclosed. He fur∣ther inform'd me, that there was brought him a large Diamond from Borneo, that was much dark∣er than one I shewed him; in∣somuch Page  39 that he compared it to Soot; but when he had cut and polished it, he and others were much surprized to find it a fair and clear Stone, of very great va∣lue.
X. The conjecture I have else∣where propos'd, that divers of the real Virtues of Gems may be pro∣bably deriv'd from the metalline, or mineral tinctures, or other Corpuseles that were imbody'd with the matter of the Gem, whilst it was yet fluid, or soft, and afterwards concoagulated therewith: This conjecture, I say, may be much countenanc'd by the following Relation, which deserves a place in this Chapter, by rea∣son of its pertinency to the Sub∣ject of it.
I have long suspected that the matter whereof Diamonds mainly consist was, whilst it was yet in Solutis Principiis, impregnated with metalline, and more particularly with martial ones: But by rea∣son Page  40 of the dearness of those Gems, and some other impediments, tho I have ben Master of several Dia∣monds of differing sizes, cut, and uncut, yet I could never make a Tryal capable of satisfying my curiosity, till having lately met with among other little curiosi∣ties that lay long neglected by me, some number of small Diamonds, that I had bought for Experi∣ments; I consider'd that their be∣ing yet rough, and so in their Natural State might make them more fit for my purpose, and so it might that they were not so clear as those that we value in Rings, which probably argued their hav∣ing more of Martial Tincture in them than I should expect in the more Diaphanous: Upon this ac∣count, I say, I took a moderate∣ly vigorous Loadstone (for 'twas none of the strongest I have had) and apply'd it successively to five or six of these small Stones, with∣out perceiving it had any Opera∣tion Page  41 on them: But when I came to apply it to one more, which look't somewhat duller than almost any of the rest, I found that it had in it Particles enough of an Iron nature to make it a Magne∣tical Body; and observ'd without surprise, that not only it would suffer it self to be taken up by the strongest Pole of the Load∣stone, but when that Pole was offer'd within a convenient di∣stance, it would readily leap through the Air to fasten it self to it.
I have elsewhere mention'd some other Qualities of Diamonds, as besides their Electrical Vertue, this, That 'tis possible that some of them may without Fire or In∣tense Heat be brought to shine; tho among all that I have Try'd, I found but two that I could so make Luminous. One of these belongs to the King, and is De∣scrib'd at the latter end of our History of Colours; and the other is Page  42 a very small one of my own; which either was quickly lost a∣mong other Stones of the same size, or quickly lost its Faculty of Shining. But, to avoid Repe∣titions, I shall here only add, that some few other Observati∣ons of a more peculiar sort than those deliver'd in the two fore∣going Pentades, may be found in other Writings of ours, to which they seem more properly to be∣long.
Page  43
CHAP. III.
Many Changes of Colour produc'd by one simple Ingredient.
I Know not any way more like∣ly to Convince the generali∣ty of Men (who are wont to be much more impress'd on by sensi∣ble Phenomena than Theories, tho solidly Founded) how great an Interest the variable Texture of Bodies may have in making them appear of differing Colours, than by shewing how the addition of a single Ingredient that either is Colour ess, or at least is not of any of the Colours to be produced, is capable (and that for the most part in a trice) by introducing a secret change of the Texture to make Page  44 the Body, 'tis put to, appear some∣times of one Colour, sometimes of another, according as the parts of the Body wrought upon are dispos'd to receive such a change as Modify's the incident Beams of Light after the manner requisite to make them exhibit a Blew, a Green, a Red, or some other par∣ticular Colour.
Upon this Consideration I thought of several Liquors, such as Aqua fortis, Oyl (as they call it) of Vitriol, or instead of it of Sulphur. Aqua Rezia, besides other Saline Liquors that I shall not now stay to name, because it may here suffice to tell you, that a∣mongst them all I made choice of the Spirit (not that which Chymists call the Oyl) of Salt, as that which is very simple, and which if it be not too much de∣phlegm'd, may be had clear and Colourless enough. With this Spirit, I proceeded to make the following Experiments upon se∣veral Page  45 Bodies, whose differing Tex∣tures made me suppose they would be fit for my purpose. And tho I could not, without much disad∣vantaging my Design, forbear to mention some Tryals that may be found elsewhere scatterd among my Writings on other occasions; yet the greatest part by odds of those laid together in this Chap∣ter, will, I presume, be found New.
I. Some drops of well Colour∣ed Syrup of Violets being let fall together upon a piece of white Paper, if a third or fourth part so much Spirit of Salt be with the tip of one's Finger mix'd with them, the Syrup will presently become of a Red Colour, usually somewhat inclining to Purple.
II. But if the Liquor to be Act∣ed on, be otherwise disposed, 'tis possible with Spirit of Salt to turn it from a Blew Colour, not to a Red, but to a Green, as I have sometimes done by letting fall in∣to Page  46 a deep Solution of Filings of Copper made with an Urinous Spirit, as that of Sal armonia•, just as many drops of Spirit of Salt as were requisite and sufficient to produce the change intended. I say just so many Drops, because a very small error either in excess or defect, may leave the mixture still Blew, or bring it to be all Colourless.
III. Upon a quantity, not ex∣ceeding many Drops of good Syrup of Violets, let fall two or three drops of good Spirit of U∣rine, Harts-horn, or the like, or of Oyl of Tartar per deliquium; and when by mixing them well, the Syrup has acquired a fine Green Colour, then by putting to it a little of the Spirit of Salt, and stirring it with the tip of your Finger, you may turn the Green Syrup (as in the first Experi∣ment you did the Blew) into a Red.
Page  47 IV. If you put a quantity of Red Rose Leaves well dryed into a Glass Vial almost full of fair Water, and soon after put to them as much Spirit of Salt as will make the Water pretty Sharp, you will quickly see both that Liquor and the contain'd Leaves brought to a fine and lovely Red, which Scarlet Colour it will re∣tain for a great while; the like effect Spirit of Salt will have on some other Vegetables of a Stip∣tick or of an Astringent Nature.
V. But if by infusing Brazil in fair Water, you make a Tincture of it, which you may much deepen by droping into it a little Spirit of Harts-horn, or of Urine; if you then put to it a little Spirit of Salt, it will presently change it from a deeply reddish Colour, oft∣entimes like that of Muskadine, to a Colour far more pale, or ra∣ther yellow, like that of the more dilute Sack; so that the same Spi∣rit acting upon two Vegetable Page  48 Tinctures differingly dispos'd, draws out and heightens redness in one, and destroys it in the other.
VI. If you make an Infusion of true Lignum Nephriticum in Spring Water, it will appear of a deep Colour, like that of Oran∣ges, when you place the Vial between the Window and your Eye, and of a fine deep Blew when you look on it with your Eye placed between it and the Window. But if you shake into this Liquor a few drops of Spi∣rit of Salt, the Caeruleous Colour will presently vanish and appear no more, in what light soever you look upon the Vial, tho the Li∣quor will still retain the Orange Colour.
VII. We took common Writ∣ing Ink, and having let fall several Drops of it upon a piece of white Paper, so that when it grew dry in the Air, some parts of the Ink lay thick and some thinner upon the Page  49 Paper whereon it did spread it self, we put a few Drops of strong Spi∣rit of Salt, some on one part of the black'd Paper, and some (or perhaps a small Drop) on another, and observ'd, as we expected, that in these places, where the Spirit had been put, or to which it reach'd, the blackness was quite destroyed, and succeeded by an unpleasant kind of Colour that seem'd for the most part to parti∣cipate of Yellow and Blew, nei∣ther of them good in its kind.
VIII. If in Spirit of Salt, you dissolve Filings of Steel, and slow∣ly evaporate the filtrated Soluti∣on, it will shoot into a kind of Vitriolum Martis that will be Green as well as that which Chy∣mists vulgarly make with Oyl of Vitriol. And to add, That on this occasion, if you take these Chrystals made with Spirit of Salt, and when they are dry, keep them in a Crucible, you will find that even a moderate Fire if duly Page  50 apply'd, will make them in a short time exchange their Green Colour for a Red, like that of the finer sort of Crocus Martis, as indeed this Operation makes them refer∣able to that sort of Medicines.
IX. We took some Mercury precipitated, per se (that is, by the sole Action of the Fire, with∣out any saline additaments) and tho crude Mercury is not as far as I have tryed, soluble in our English Spirit of Salt; yet this Red Precipitate (which is suppos'd to be meer Mercury) with its own Sulphur extraverted, did readily enough dissolve in that Liquor, and if I very much misremember not, did not at all impart its own Colour to it: And I also found that Red-Lead or Minium being boyl'd a while in good Spirit of Salt, the Redness did totally dis∣appear. So that the same Agent that produces Redness in divers Bodies, did in those two, I have been mentioning, more than Page  51 change it, since it quite abolish∣ed it. Of which also, I can give you an easier instance, by observ∣ing that the Reddest Coral being dissolv'd in our Menstruum, the Redness vanishes, and the Soluti∣tion appears Colourless.
X. Take Filings of Copper, (the smallest are the fittest for this Ex∣periment), and having poured on them good Spirit of Salt till it swim, about two fingers breadth over them; keep the Vial in a pret∣ty strong Heat (in a Sand Furnace) till you perceive the Menstruum has dissolv'd a competent part of the Metal: Then warily take out the Vial, and holding it be∣tween your Eye and the Light, you will perceive the Solution of Cop∣per to be not like that of Steel formerly mentioned, of a Green Colour, but of a dark and trou∣bled one, oftentimes inclining to a deep, but muddy Red.
XI. But if you pour this Solu∣tion into a wide-mouth Glass, and Page  52 let it stand for a competent time, (which sometimes amounts but to a few hours, and sometimes to very many) the expos'd Liquor will appear of a Green, much finer than that of the Chrystals of Mars.
XII. Take filtrated and limpid Solution of Silver, or of Mercury made in Aqua fortis, and drop upon it some Spirit of Salt, by which you shall find the clear Liquor turn'd white as Milk, which after a while will let fall a precipitate of the same Co∣lour.
XIII. And if instead of a Solu∣tion of Silver or Quick-silver, you take a Red Solution or Tincture of Benjamin, or of the Resinous part of Jallap Root, or you'le also have upon the Affu∣sion of Spirit of Salt, a white Liquor and a Precipitate of the same Colour.
XIV. Being desirous to produce two differingColours at once by the Page  53 same Affusion of Spirit of Salt, I infused some dryed red Rose leaves in fair Water, till it had acqui∣red a deep Colour from them. To this Infusion, pour'd off warily, that it might be clear, I added a considerable proportion of the sweet Liquor, made by digesting Spirit of Vinegar upon red Lead, by which I knew 'twould be turn'd of a Blewish Green. Upon this almost opacous Liquor, I pour'd Spirit of Salt, which as I expect∣ed, precipitated the Lead that had been dissolv'd in the sweet Liquor, into a very white Powder, and gave the remaining Liquor, well impregnated with particles of the Rose Leaves, a very fine and du∣rable Scarlet Colour. To which Experiment I shall add on this oc∣casion, that if it had been well made, you may barely by shak∣ing very well together and con∣founding the White Powder with the Red Liquor, make a Carnation Colour, which (when 'tis made as it Page  54 should be) appear'd very fine and lovely whilst it lasted, for in no long time the two Substances that compos'd it, would by degrees separate, and re-appear each of them in its former place and Co∣lour.
XV. We took some Spirit of Salt, that having lain long upon Fylings of Copper, had lost the muddy Tincture it had first ac∣quired by being almost boil'd up∣on them. This Liquor, I say, that look'd like common Water, we pour'd into a small, but wide-mouth'd Christal-Glass, about half an hour after 8 in the Morning, and leaving it in a Window, it ap∣pear'd after 40 Minutes to have there acquir'd a Colour, much like that of a German Amethist, and seem'd to have no tendency to Greenness. But being detain'd by the visit of a Virtuoso till ele∣ven a Clock, I could not see what happen'd in the mean time: But then as he was going away, I Page  55 invited him to see the Liquor, which he (not knowing what it was) told me it look'd of a Grass∣green Colour, wherein tho I were not altogether of his mind, yet in a short time after, it did to me also appear of a lovely Green; in its passage to which it had in all been expos'd about 3 hours and a half
XVI. Precipitate a strong So∣lution of Sublimate, (made in fair Water) with a s. q. (and no more) of Oyl of Tartar per deliquium. Put the Liquor and Powder into a Filter of Cap-paper, and when the Water is run thorow, there will remain in the Filter the Precipi∣tate, which is to be slowly and well dry'd. Then take it out of the Filter, in the form of a gross Powder, and having put it into a clear Glass, let fall on it warily some Drops of pretty strong Spirit of Salt, and (if the Experiment succeeds with you as it did with me) during the Conflict that will Page  56 be made, the little Lumps of the Precipitate will lose all their for∣mer Brick-dust Colour, and turn White, tho afterwards they will appear dissolv'd into a transparent Liquor, wherein the Orange Co∣lour is quite abolish'd.
XVII. Having calcin'd Copper without any Additament, save Fire and Water (by the way we elsewhere mention) we took an Arbitrary quantity of it, and having pour'd on it about 3 or 4 times the quantity of good Spirit of Salt, we obtain'd (what we look'd for) both a Muddy, but manifestly Reddish Liquor, and (somewhat to the surprize of the Persons I had a mind to satisfy) a white Powder, whose quantity bore a considerable proportion to the Part that was dissolv'd, (but whose Qualities be∣long not to this place) In which part its self, (to add that upon the by) by the affusion of common Water, and the action of the Air, we afterwards produc'd more than Page  57 one change of Colour.
XVIII. We sometimes for Curi∣osity sake took a quantity, not ex∣ceeding a spoonful, of the dark brown or somewhat reddish Soluti∣on of ♀, mention'd in the forego∣ing Experiment, and having put it into a cylindrical Vial, that the change of Colour may appear the better, we pour'd on it 2 or 3 Spoonfuls of totally ardent vi∣nous Spirit, and giving the Glass a shake to mingle them, we pre∣sently had (as soon as the mixture became clear) a lovely green Li∣quor, which when 'twas well set∣led, was very fair, and lookt al∣most as if it were a liquid Eme∣rald.
XIX. We took some green Taf∣fatee Ribband, and having moist∣en'd one part of it, that was not great, twice or thrice with good Spirit of Salt, we suffer'd it to dry of its self; which it did in a short time, and then we found as we ex∣pected, that the wetted part was Page  58 no longer of a Green, but chang'd to a Blew Colour. But the same Spirit, (to add that upon the by) presently turn'd that part of a piece of black Ribband, upon which we put 2 or 3 Drops of it to a Colour not unlike that which they call Fueille Morte, or, a fading Leaf.
XX. 'Tis usual in Paper-shops, and in divers other places, to meet with Pamphlets and other thin Books that are covered with Pa∣pers that look sometimes of a Greenish Blew Colour, bordering upon Purple, and sometimes upon that of Violets. Some of the deeper colour'd Papers of this sort, I have several times to gratify some curious Persons, especially of the Sex, held in my left hand, and with the other lightly and nimbly toucht them here and there with the end of a feather (cut off from the rest of the Quill) dipt in Spirit of Salt, which almost in the twinkling of an Eye, dy'd Page  59 the toucht parts of the Paper with a Lovely Red, that would some∣times continue very Vivid for a good while, and be manifest at the end of divers Weeks, if not Months. And if instead of the forementioned Quil, I took into my right hand (a Brush, or) some∣what that was fit to sprinkle with, and having dipt it in the Saline Spirit, made many drops at once fall upon the Paper, 'twas plea∣sant enough to behold how sud∣denly and prettily it would be Speckled.
XXI. VVe took Antimony well powder'd, and pour'd on it 3 or 4 times its weight of good Spirit of Salt; we caus'd it to be boil'd in this Liquor, (and that in a Glass Vessel) wherein a part of it was dissolv'd, and taken up into the Menstruum;where the Antimony quite lost its blackness. And this thus impregnated Spirit of Salt, being dropt into fair VVater, the black Mineral subsided immediate∣ly, Page  60 in the form of a very white Powder or Precipitate.
To these I might add other changes of Colours, that I have made, by the help of Spirit of Salt. But these being not of so quick and easy Tryal, (especially be∣cause some of them require skill in Chymistry) I thought it not fit to annex them; supposing that those already deliver'd, amount∣ing to above four Pentades, may suffice for the purpose declar'd at the begining of this Paper. And also to afford us this Reflection, That it may not be amiss, if Phy∣sicians, Chymists, and others that are wont to compound Drugs, or other Ingredients; would be less forward than they usually are, to mingle, not to say to jumble, seve∣ral of them together, either un∣necessary, or without due regard to the friendly and incongruous Qualities (in reference to one an∣other) that the separate Ingredi∣ents may have. For most of us Page  61 are but too lyable to be mistaken, when we presume before-hand, what changes the Coalition, or o∣ther Associations of differing Bo∣dies may produce; especially if they be either Saline, or plenti∣fully partakers of a Saline Na∣ture; Since Experience frequent∣ly shews, that by the Action and Reaction that are consequent up∣on untry'd ways of Composition, there Emerge in the mixture new Consistences and other Qualities or Accidents, that were not look'd for, when the Ingredients 'tis com∣pounded of, were put together. And tho it may sometimes happen luckily enough, that these Emer∣gent Qualities, whether of Drugs, or other Comparatively simple Bo∣dies, may prove advantagious; yet this may well be look'd upon but as a lucky chance; and hin∣ders not, but that one may justly fear that ordinarily the newly pro∣duc'd quality of a Medicine, may prove to be either worse than was Page  62 expected, or at least other than was design'd, and consequently less fit for the Physicians or the Artists determinate purpose.
CHAP. IV.
An Advertisement touching those Passages that in this Book relate to the Art of Medicine.
THE favourable Reception the Publick was pleas'd to give two Editions set forth in one Year of The Usefulness of Experi∣mental Philosophy, having Encou∣rag'd the Stationer to Solicite me for a new Impression, I was on the same ground invited to think of making additions to divers Page  63 parts of that Treatise; but after∣wards observing that notwith∣standing the Thanks and Acknow∣ledgments I had the good fortune to receive from several Physicians (some of them of great Reputati∣on, and perhaps by that only known to me) yet others were not well pleas'd that a Person not of their Profession should offer to meddle with it, tho with a de∣sign of advancing it: I, whose condition exempted me from tak∣ing upon me their Calling, and who consequently must want many opportunities that others injoy'd of making Observations about the Phaenomena of Diseases and of Medicines, suffer'd my self with∣out much violence to be diverted to other Studies more suitable to my Inclinations, as well as to my Condition, and accordingly I laid aside the Papers I had Written in reference to the Physicians Art, nor were it easy, or perhaps possi∣ble for me to retrieve them, after Page  64 they have lain so many Years dis∣pers'd and neglected, by which means perchance divers of them have been lost.
But all this could not hinder me from being press'd to retrieve and communicate these scatter'd and dusty Papers by the Secretary of the Royal Society Mr. H. Olden∣burgh: For as this Gentleman has been almost every where wonder∣fully solicitous to preserve every thing from being lost, that may any way contribute to increase the stock of useful knowledg. So hav∣ing got notice of these Papers, and a sight of some of them, his partiality for me made him much over-value them, and perswaded him that a Collection of them as incoherent and unfinisht as they were, might be of some use to the Physicians Art. And this seem'd the more hopeful, because Natu∣ral Philosophy being a Science of far greater Extent than Physick, and supplying it, with many of its Page  65 Principles and Theories; 'tis very Possible that Naturalists, tho not Profest Physicians, may propose some such comprehensive Notions and Methods, as may awaken and inlarge the minds of them that are so, and at least afford some useful hints to considering and in∣genious Men. And in effect di∣vers Physicians, as well as many Patients, have been pleas'd to de∣clare (some in Print, and some other ways) that sometimes they found not useless assistances from some of those Papers, wherein I occasionally touch'd on Medicinal things. Such Motives as these made Mr. Oldenburg so earnest to procure the scatter'd Fragments, that I might have yet remaining, about Medicinal Affairs, that tho for the Reasons mention'd above, I could not think it fit to make a Collection of Papers so unlike in their Subjects, so disproporti∣onate in their Bulk, and so unfini∣sh'd and imperfect on divers scores; Page  66 Yet thus far I was content to com∣ply with his desires, that when these Trifles came to hand, I would now and then insert them among my Experimenta & Observationes Physicoe. (Medicine being a Part, or an Application of Natural Phi∣losophy) especially if there were any great affinity between the Paper I lighted on, and the Sub∣ject I was then treating of: Know∣ing well that Mr. Oldenburg, and perhaps some others too, had ra∣ther I should impart them at all adventures, than suppress what they judg'd might be useful; and that 'twas better to run the hazard of having them slighted, than lost.
This Advertisement I thought fit to give in this place, once for all, that when hereafter there shall occur any thing among these Experimenta & Observationes Physicae, that directly relates to the Phy∣sician's Art, you may not think it strange, remembring upon what account I ventur'd to meddle with Page  67 things of that Nature, and also that you may readily understand what I mean, when you meet with any Particulars delivered, as Thoughts or Desiderata or Wishes, tending to, or aiming at the Improvement of Medicine; which how slight or superfluous soever they may be to Experienc'd Masters, to whom I did not presume to recommend them, I thought might probably be serviceable to a very Ingenious, but yet Young Cultivator of that noble Art, (whose Name, I con∣ceal'd after the way of the Curi∣ous of Germany under that of Tral∣lianus,) for whose use they were intended.
The I. PENTADE.
EXPERIMENT I.
A very Tall and well Set Gentleman, Aged about 24 years, by a Fall from his Horse, had Page  68 his Skull broken in several places, and being a Person of good Estate, had several Chirurgeons to attend him in the course of his Sickness; during which he was divers times Trepan'd, and had several pieces of his Skull taken off, which left great Chasms (that I have seen and felt) between the remaining Parts. Within about three days after his Fall, this Knight (for so he now is) was taken with a Dead Palsey on his Right Side, which did not equally affect his Arm and his Leg: The use of the latter being somtimes suddenly Restor'd to him in some measure, and (tho seldom) after a while al∣most as suddenly Lost: But his Arm and Head were constantly Paralytical, being wholly depriv'd of Motion; and having so little Sense, that it would sometimes lye under his Body without his Feeling it. But if his Hand were prick't with a Pin, he could take notice of it. This Palsey con∣tinu'd Page  69 during almost the whole time of the Cure, which lasted 23 or 24 Weeks. And when the Chi∣rurgeons were going to close up his Head, as having no more to do; one of them who was an In∣genious Man, and Tenant to this Gentleman, oppos'd all the rest, alledging, that, if they did no more, the Gentleman would lead an Useless and very Melancholy Life; and that he was confident, the Palsey was some way or other occasion'd by the Fall, which had left somthing in the Head that they had not yet discover'd. And the Knight himself agreeing to this Man's motion, his Head was further laid open; and at length, under a piece of proud Flesh, they found, with much ado, a Splin∣ter, or rather Flake, of a Bone, that bore hard upon the dura ma∣ter, and was not pull'd out with∣out a great Hemorrhage, and such a stretch of the Parts, as made the Patient think his Brain it self Page  70 was tearing out. But this Mis∣chief was soon Remedy'd, and his Hurts securely Heal'd up; and he is now a Strong Healthy Man, and finds no Inconvenience by having so broad and various a Callus instead of the Skull; save that he is a little obnoxious to take Cold in his Head. But the memorable Circumstances, for whose sake I mention this Narra∣tive, were these: When I ask'd him how big the Bone was, that was last taken out? He told me, that it was less than half the Nail of one of his Fingers (not his Thumb) and that it was al∣most as thin, being in size and shape like the Scale of a Fish: But that it did not in his Head lye flat, but bore hard upon the dura mater. When I ask'd him how long after it was taken out, he began to feel some Relief, as to his Paralytic Distemper? He re∣ply'd, That in less than five hours he found himself, to his great Page  71 joy, able to move his little Fin∣ger; and (tho this happen'd in the Evening) he was the next morning able to move all his Fin∣gers, and within 2 or 3 days after to lift up his Arm: By which it seem'd manifest, that so little a Body as the Splinter lately men∣tion'd, produc'd in so robust a Per∣son, a Palsey of the whole side it lay on. For when I particularly ask't him, Whether, after the tak∣ing away of the proud Flesh that encompass'd the little Bone, he did not find, if he found none be∣fore, some Relief as to his Palsey? He answer'd, that he found none at all, till the Bone had been pull'd out, which was not till a good while after the Chirurgeon had been by degrees eating off the proud Flesh that, grew about it. But there was in this case another Phoenomenon that I thought little less considerable than the former. For, remembring the important controversie, that is agitated a∣mong Page  72 modern Physicians and Ana∣tomists, about Nutrition by the Nerves, and having thereupon ask'd this Knight, whether he did not find an Atrophy in the Limbs of his Body that were affected? He told me, that when he began to be Paralytic on that side, it by degrees much wasted, and the Paralytic Leg was very much Ex∣tenuated: But the Arm and Hand much more, seeming nothing but a System of Bones, with the Skin pasted on them. And when I further ask'd, if upon the re∣moval of the Bony Splinter above∣mentioned, the Atrophy of the Parts did not also begin to lessen; he answered affirmatively, and told me, that in no very long time his Leg and Arm recover'd their wonted Dimensions; and in effect I (some days since) saw the restor'd Arm well plump'd up with mus∣culous Flesh, tho the Weather were exceeding Cold. And he further told me, that he found Page  73 no difference between the Limbs that had been Paralytic, and the others, except that they would grow sooner and more sensibly cold in Sharp or Frosty Weather.
This Gentleman answer'd me, to add that upon the by, that, during the course of his Cure, he was very frequently (almost every second day) let Blood; that he wanted not Appetite to his Meat; that for the most part he slept in∣different well; and, which was more remarkable, upon so great a Hurt of the Head he did not Vomit, not had afterwards any Convulsions.
II. Among other Instances I have met with, that shew the great Power which sudden Pas∣sions of the mind may have upon the Body, I remember that a Wo∣man of middle Age, complain'd sadly to me of the mischief, a Fright had done her; for she re∣lated to me, that having taken along with her to a Meadow by a Page  74 River-side, a little Boy that she was dotingly fond of, whilst she was busie about the work she came thither for, the Child stole away from her, and went along the Bank, to delight himself with the View of the Stream; but being heedless, it seems by Circumstan∣ces, that he set his Foot upon some piece of Ground that the Water had made hollow; upon which account, the Earth failing under the weight of the Boy's body pressing it, that, and he fell toge∣ther into the River: In the mean time the poor Mother casually missing her Child, hastily cast her Eyes towards the brink of the River, and not being able to see him there, she presently concluded him to be Drown'd, and was struck with so much horrour up∣on the sudden accident that tore from her a favorite Son, that a∣mong other mischiefs, she fell in∣to a Dead Palsy of her right Arm and Hand, which continu'd with Page  75 her in spight of what she had done to remove it, till the time she complain'd of it to me, who had not opportunity to know what became of her afterwards.
III. On the other side, to show that Violent Passions, and even Frights may sometimes, tho very seldom, do good, as well as harm; I shall here add a Relati∣on that was circumstantially made me by the learned Person himself, to whom the Accident happen'd. I familiarly knew a Gentleman that liv'd to be an Eminent Vir∣tuoso, and to oblige many by his useful Writings, who when he was a Youth, fell into a violent and obstinate Sciatica, which con∣tinu'd with him so long, that it left him little hope of Recovery; but the Devotion of this Young man's Friends invited them to make him be carry'd, since he could not go, to Church upon Sundays; and there it happen'd, that the Town being a Frontier Page  76 Garrison, the Guards were so neg∣ligent, that there was occasion given to a very hot Alarum, that the Enemy was got into the Town, and was advancing towards the Church to Massacre all that were in it. This so amaz'd and terrifi'd the People, that in very great and disorderly hast, they all ran out of the Church, and left my Relator in his Pew upon a Seat that they plac'd him, and whence he could not remove without help: But he being no less fright∣ed than the rest, as they forgot him, he forgot his Disease, and made a shift to hamper off the Pew, and follow those that fled; but it quickly appearing, that the Alarum had been a false one, his Friends began to think in what a condition they had left him, and hasten'd back to help him out of the Pew, which whilst they were going to do, they, to their great surprise found him in the way upon his feet, and walk∣ing Page  77 as freely as other Men. And when he told me this Story, he was above forty years Elder than when he was thus strangely res∣cu'd, and in all that time, never had one Fit of the Sciatica.
ADVERTISEMENT.
'Tis easy to be observ'd, that of the two kinds into which Chy∣mists may be conveniently enough sorted; the Number is greater of those that are not Profest Phy∣sicians, than of those that are: And yet several of the former sort are led by their more free Curi∣osity, or their particular Designes, to allow a large scope to their Try∣als; and so in their Experiments upon various Bodies, to operate upon some of those that may be reduc'd (either directly, or by sit applications) to the Materia Medi∣ca, and afford uncommon Prepa∣rations: Which tho design'd for other purposes, may by a skilful Page  78 Physician, with a light Variation, and perhaps without any, be made to afford good Medicines: And therefore I think it may be no inconsiderable service to the Publick, if by the leave and assist∣ance of the Authors, divers Chy∣mical Experiments that are not directly useful to their immediate purpose, were not, (as is usual) thrown away, but put into the hands of some Sagacious Physi∣cian.
Upon these grounds, I thought my self little less than oblig'd, to set apart now and then an Ex∣periment that contain'd some un∣common Preparation, which seem'd applicable to Medicine; and to try whether, tho, being in the Country or in some other inconvenient Circumstances, I had not opportunity to prove it my self, the notice given of it, might not happen to be of use to a skil∣ful Physician.
Page  79 I shall therefore partly in this Chapter, and partly (if God per∣mit) in some following Chapters and other Writings, tender to such a one, some few of the Ex∣periments of this sort, that I late∣ly lighted on among my Adversa∣ria, and that seem'd not uncapa∣ble to be made of some service to the Physician's Art.
Of the good and bad effects of these, I shall be glad to be in∣form'd, that they may be either us'd more freely and improv'd, or corrected and quite laid aside; and I desire that this short Pre∣amble may serve for a general one to all the other design'd Chymi∣cal Medicins that I shall venture to propose hereafter.
Page  80
A Design'd Chymical Medi∣cine.
IV. I know how much Men are prejudic'd in some whole Coun∣tries, against Vomitive Medicines: and I remember we have had here in London a Physician of great Fame and Practice, that would turn over a Patient to an∣other Doctor, if the Case were such that the Patient would needs make use of Emeticks. And I readily acknowledg that they are edg'd Tools, that require a Skil∣ful Hand, to imploy them with∣out danger of doing more harm than good: But since Experience shews that where the Patient can bear them, and the Disease requires them, they act more speedily and effectually than other evacuating Medicines: And since the genera∣lity of our Physicians, not ex∣cepting some that are justly re∣puted Page  81 very Cautious, do not scruple frequently to make use of the Infusion of Crocus Metallorum, tho it do not seldom prove a Re∣medy harsh enough; I shall ven∣ture in compliance with some in∣genious Physicians, and others that have often made use of a Me∣dicine, that goes under the name of my Emetick Drops, to com∣municate the Preparation of them; without pressing the use any other∣wise than by confessing that divers Practitioners of Physick of differ∣ing Sentiments, agree in assuring me, that they have not yet found any Emetick to work so effectu∣ally, nor with more ease and safe∣ty, than this Liquor; which some of them prefer by much to other Antimonial Vomits; and especial∣ly to the Infusion ofCrocus Metal∣lorum.
In preparing my Vomitive Li∣quor, I have not always imploy'd the same proportion of the Ingre∣dients 'tis made of, nor did I find Page  82 it necessary to be nice in that mat∣ter. But the proportion I some∣what prefer, is to take two Parts of well chosen and finely powder'd Antimony, and on these to pour three Parts of the Menstruum, viz. Sp.; which ought to be rather moderately strong, than too much rectified. These are to be distill'd together in a Glass Retort fitted with a Receiver not very small, till there come over a great part of the Menstruum, which will usu∣ally towards the close be accom∣pany'd with Red Flores, (some times copious enough) which be∣ing separated by filtration through Cap-paper, the clear transmitted Liquor is to be put into a Glass, not newly wash'd, but dry on the inside, and to be kept close stopt from all Intercourse with the Air.
The Dose is usually to a Man or Woman, especially at the first time, from 4 or 5, to 7 or 8 Drops: But I know an Ingenious Physician Page  83 that gives to 10 or 12, or a few more Drops, if the Case be ur∣gent; and by that means he told me, that with a small Button-Bot∣tle, that I chanc'd to give him a little before, he did in 2 or 3 hours rescue three Gentlemen, that by a bad Surfet with very bad Circumstances, were suddenly brought into great danger of spee∣dy Death, and carry'd to a neigh∣bouring Tavern, as being too ill to be carry'd home.
The Vehicle may be a Spoonful or two of Wine, or Black-Cherry Water, or (which divers Persons chuse rather) of Spring-Water, Drinking up the Liquor immedi∣ately after, because there will some Precipitation be made; and then taking 2 or 3 Spoonfuls of the same Vehicle to wash it down. It usually begins to work early, and does it without causing near so much straining as vulgar Eme∣ticks, and yet makes Copious E∣vacuations; and sometimes so Page  84 Eradicative of the Morbifick mat∣ter, that the Physician lately men∣tion'd, who Cur'd the three Gen∣tlemen, having a poor Patient who had Conflicted for above three Years with an Ague in se∣veral Types, but most commonly Quartanary, perfectly Cur'd him with two Doses of these Drops, and a Julap made chiefly of the Distill'd Water of a common Vi∣triolick Mineral. And this Cure seem'd therefore to me, when the Physician gave me an account of the Drops he had from me, the more considerable, because the Patient had made use of great Variety of Remedies; and parti∣cularly he devour'd great store of the Jesuits Bark, or Cortex Peru∣vianus, (perhaps because it was not well Condition'd, or skilful∣fully Administer'd) which some∣times alter'd the Type of his Ague, turning it to a single or a double Tertian, and sometimes kept off the Fits for a while, when Page  85 'twas a Quartane, but never Cur'd him quite; and left him in a de∣plorable estate, wherein the Eme∣tick Drops found him.
Tho I sent this Medicine to se∣veral Patients, in whom, thanks be to God, it succeeded more than ordinarily well, yet I durst not venture to give it to Chil∣dren, or to very young Persons; but having gratifi'd an Ingenious Surgeon of good Practice, with a stock of it, the Tryals he made upon divers Persons, with great Success on other Patients, im∣bolden'd him to give it to Boys and Girls, and afterwards even to several Children, whereof he gave me a good Account, only he discreetly took care to pro∣portion his Doses to the Age and Strength of his Patients, and not to give the whole Dose at once, but divide it into 2 or 3 parts, that if the first should work with∣in half an hour or less, the second should not be given, or lessen'd in Page  86 quantity. And if neither the se∣cond did work within about an hour, he added the third. And by this Cautious Method, he as∣sur'd me that he had suddenly re∣liev'd several Children in bad Cases, and found not any mischief or danger ensue upon the admini∣stration of it. But Children be∣ing tender Creatures, this is to be further and cautiously try'd.
POSTSCRIPT.
Having had occasion to keep by me some Vials furnish'd with the Emetick Drops, longer than I thought I should need to do so: I observ'd that in tract of time, there, began to subside a white Powder, wherein a good part of the Emetick faculty of the Medi∣cine may be suppos'd to reside; therefore 'twill be best either to imploy the Liquor in no long time after 'tis made, or if one has not leisure or conveniency to do so, to Page  87 shake the Vial well (that the Powder may be rais'd and we'l dis∣pers'd through it) just before it be administer'd.
A Design'd Chymical Medi∣cine.
There are many that having a high Esteem for Chalybeate Wa∣ters, such as those of the Spaw and Tunbridg, which yet in many places are not to be had at all, and in few to be had well condition'd, are very Solicitous to find Suc∣cedaneums to them. To gratify some Ingenious Persons of this sort (and improve a casual hint taken from a Book of a somewhat like Preparation propo••ded for another purpose) I remember, I Employ'd a way of Aemulating such Waters that answer'd the outward Phaenomena of Colour and Taste, and seem by the pau∣city and harmlesness of their In∣gredients Page  88 like to be innocent Me∣dicines; I had no opportunity to make tryal of them in Physick, but finding that some Inquisitive Cultivaters of that Art, valu'd them more than I did, I commit∣ted the Experiment to Paper, and now suffer it to come abroad, that it may be try'd by Physicians, and either rejected or made use of, as success shall direct. The Experi∣ment as I made it, was this.
We took one part of very good Fylings of ♂; and ten parts of good Distill'd Vinegar. These we put into a Bolt-head, and shop'd it well, and then in a mild heat of Sand we digested them for about two days, and afterwards aug∣mented the Heat till the Liquor appear'd of a deep Orange Colour, but yet transparent. Part of this Tincture we pour'd off, and kept well stop'd by its self, because tho by a longer digestion and a great∣er heat, we obtain'd a very red Tincture, yet we did not so much Page  89 value it, because when the Men∣struum is over Impregnated, the Metal usually precipitates, and the fine Colour is destroy'd. Of the first reserv'd Tincture, we let fall 4 Drops into ℥ VIIIss, (8 ℥ss) of clear common Water, whose Colour was not thereby sensibly alter'd; and the Vial containing this Mixture being well shaken, that the Tincture might diffuse it self the more thorowly, we kept it carefully stop'd for use, as being our Factitious or Counterfeit Spaw. A Spoonful or somewhat more of this, with about a quar∣ter of a Grain, or less, of good fresh Powder of Gauls, would presently afford a Purplish Tinct∣ure, like that of Natural Springs impregnated with Mars, such as the Water of the German Spaw, or of Tunbridg in Kent; if ones Mouth were Wash'd with it, 'twas found to have like those Natural Chalybeat Waters, a manifestly faeruginous tast. N. B. These Ar∣tificial Page  90Acidulae are to be Admi∣nister'd in no long time after they are made; for Experience has in∣form'd me, that (at least some∣times) when I kept them too long, within not many days after they were made, they would lose much, if not most of their Briskness and Force. And I sometimes perceive that there would subside to the bottom a certain red or reddish Substance, as it were Oker, which was a token of the Degeneracy of the Liquor; and some such thing I have observ'd in some Na∣tural Chalybeat Waters too long or negligently kept. But our Aci∣dulae may be so soon and so cheap∣ly made freshly, that the above mention'd Inconveniency will scarce to the Skilful seem conside∣rable.
Page  91
The II. PENTADE.
EXPERIMENT II.
Because it may be on some occa∣sions of use to a Physician, to have ways of Discovering the Adulterateness of Bezoar Stone, which for its dearness is often Counterfeited, and not easily dis∣cern'd to be so by the common ways of Exploring, which use to be uncertain enough; it may not be amiss to Communicate a new way of Tryal, which 'tis unlike that Impostors have dream'd of, or if they should know it, can easily elude. And this I am the rather willing to do, because the propos'd way may afford an useful hint to the Sagacious Inquirers in∣to the Nature, and some of the Preparations that may be made, of the Bezoar Stone; which tho it be a Drug too much Magnify'd by some Physicians, especially Page  92 those that depend on it, against the true Plague; yet a Physician of great Experience, and rather a severe, than any ways a partial Judg of it, allows it to be an ex∣cellent Remedy even in Malignant and ill-condition'd Fevers, at least if they be not truly Pestilential. One of the ways I imploy'd, in treating the Bezoar Stone, may be easily gather'd from the ensuing Transcript of one of my register'd Experiments.
We took 40 or 50 Grains of choice Oriental Bezoar Stone re∣duc'd to Powder, and in a Bolt∣glass pour'd on it. ʒVI of good Spirit of Niter, as well to try whether this Liquor would prove a fit Menstruum for: this Stone, as we found it to be for the Calculus Humanus, as for other purposes. And tho this Affusion being pur∣posely made in the Cold, the Li∣quor did not seem at first to work on the Stone; yet soon after it fell violently upon it, and dissolv'd the Page  93 greater part of it, not without noise and a Notable Effervescence. The Solution was almost Red, and the Glass being put in a digestive Furnace, the whole Powder was not only dissolv'd, but being left a night or two in a North Window, it afforded divers Saline Concreti∣ons, much larger than could well have been expected from so small a quantity of matter; and these Crystals, whilst they were yet in the Glass, might easily be taken for Crystals of Salt-peter, so great was their resemblance.
To manifest how much the fa∣culties of loosening and binding, are relative things, and depend upon the Disposition of the Body to be wrought upon, and so upon the Congruity betwixt the Agent, and the Patient, I know an In∣genious Gentlewoman, on whom Cinnamon, which generally is a considerable Astringent and Sto∣machick Medicine, has a quite con∣trary Operation, and that in a Page  94 strange degree, insomuch that having found by 2 or 3 acciden∣tal Tryals, that a very little Cin∣namon seem'd to disorder her Sto∣mach and prove Laxative, she re∣solv'd once to satisfy her self, whe∣ther those Discomposures came by Chance, or no; and having strew'd some powder'd Cinnamon upon a Tost, she was going to put into her Ale, upon eating the Tost she was copiously Purg'd for two days together, and that with such violence, that it put her in∣to Convulsion Fits, and a kind of Spasmus Cynicus, which she could never be perfectly freed from, be∣ing troubled with from time to time for. 3 Years, as was the other day averr'd to me, and divers others that know her, by her Hus∣band who is himself a Learned Man and a profest Physician.
A prosperous Physician, to whom I had recommended some things relating to his Profession whilst he practis'd it with Success Page  95 in the Capital City of Ireland, where at that time there rag'd a new and violent Fever, whereof Multitudes Dy'd, very few Pati∣ents Recovering of it, happily lighted on a Method that prov'd, through God's Blessing, very Pros∣perous. This Doctor returning into Ireland sometimes before, hav∣ing been desir'd by me to send me an account of some things relating to Natural Philosophy and Phy∣sick that I nam'd to him, wrought to me in answer to some of my Enquiries a Letter, out of which I thought fit to make this Extract, because I know not but that it may give good hints towards the Cure of some other ill-condition'd Fevers.
Page  96
Dublin, Feb. 27. 1682.
I Have imployed Ens Veneris for the removal of a Subsultus Ten∣dinum, in a Person dangerously Sick of a Febris Petechialis (a Dis∣case fatal to very many here for these 12 or 14 Months) and found that it answer'd my hopes in 3 or 4 Hours after I gave it in Conserve of Borrage Flowers.
I have, since I came from Eng∣land, thought of a Method of Curing the aforesaid Fever, which has not once fail'd me, tho I made of it for 16 or 18 several Persons, many of which would certainly Dye, if treated after the usual manner in this case. If I should tell you from what Observations and Reasonings I came to alter the Method of Cure, I should be very tedious. I shall therefore at present wave that, and proceed to tell you, That when first I come Page  97 to any Sick of this Disease, if I find Costive (as generally they are) I prescribe a Glister, and after that an Episplastick Plaister 6 or 7 Inches broad, and 8 or 9 Inches Long, to be apply'd between the Shoulders; the Blister being well rais'd, I order to be Dress'd care∣fully, stripping off the Cuticula. This continues running till the Fe∣ver is gone off; which is most com∣monly in 10 or 12 days, if they have not kept up too long with it, and then we cannot certainly foretel the time of the Fever's de∣clination; for the whole time till the going off of the Fever, I Pre∣scribe Emulsions of Aq. Aronis, Card. Bened. Citrij totius & Syr. Granatorum cum Aceto; I allow of Orange and Butter-milk Pos∣sets, of roasted Apples, Flumme∣ry, or any other light and cool∣ing thing they call for.
By this Method I keep the Genus Nervosum and Brain from being Affected, and consequently Page  98 secure my Patients; for as many as I have ever known of them Dye, that were troubled with this Disease, Dy'd of a disorder of those Parts. I do not defer the Blister∣ing Plaisters, as others do, till I find my Patients Delirous, Lethar∣gick, Convulsive, or otherwise af∣fected in their Heads and Nerves, finding by the Experience of others that then they most com∣monly prove ineffectual, because of some Morbifick Matters being too deeply lodg'd in these parts. I do not prescribe, except upon some extraordinary occasions, any Volatile Salts or Spirits, or any thing too apt to quicken the al∣ready over-brisk Circulation of the Blood, having Experimental∣ly Learn'd that by these often us'd, the Brain and Nerves become sooner than ordinary affected, for as much as they deeply insinuate themselves, and drive with them some Morbifick Matter into the Brain and Nerves. I find Bleeding Page  99 bad, being generally Fatal. If I doubt of the Recovery of any of my Patients Sick of this Disease, 'tis only when I find that they have been let Blood, or lain for 8 or 9 days before I come to them; tho I have brought through it, even Persons in those Circumstan∣ces.
A Design'd Chymical Medi∣cine.
I shall not, because I need not, Discourse of the Medicinal Vertues of Steel in a City where many Learned Physicians do so much esteem and imploy Chalybeate Me∣dicines as they do in London, and therefore I shall content my self at this time to offer you a couple of Preparations of Steel that possibly you have not met with or thought of.
1. Considering that most of the ways made use of by Chymists to Page  100 prepare Steel, tend by dividing it into very Minute parts, to make it more lyable to be wrought on by the Liquors of the Stomach, and some other parts of the Body, and that the generality of these Cha∣lybeate Preparations are wont to be made only with Acids, whe∣ther manifest, as Oyl of Vitriol, Spirit of Vinegar, &c. or Occult, as Brimstone, which tho insipid in its Natural State, when it comes to be Melted, discloses its hidden Salt, and works on ♂ by a sharp Acidity; considering this, I say, and that Men have con∣fin'd themselves to Acids in work∣ing on Steel, because they sup∣pos'd Instruments of that kind were necessary to dissolve that Metal, I thought it might do you, and some Ingenious Men of your Profession, some little Ser∣vice, if I propos'd to you a way of Opening the Body of Steel, that tho I gave a hint of it di∣vers Years ago, is, for ought I know, yet unpractis'd.
Page  101 We took then several Ounces of highly rectify'd Spirit of ferment∣ed (or putrify'd) Urine made per se, and consequently without Quick∣lime, and pour'd it upon as much Filings of Steel freshly made, to be sure, not to have any Rusty ones, as we guest, would at least suffice to satiate it fully. These we put in a moderately warm place, where the Menstruum wrought on the Metal for divers hour to∣gether, and Dissolv'd a conside∣rable part of it. This Solution we set to filter, and found it of a Taste considerably strong, but ve∣ry different from any of the Cha∣lybeat Preparations, we remem∣bered, that were seen made with Acids. The Liquor being kept in a stopt Viol for some days near a Window, did in the Cold let fall by degrees a considerable quantity of Powder of a deep Green Colour, which surpriz'd some Virtuosi, to whom I shew'd it, especially because the Liquor Page  102 it self was not of that Colour; tho at least the superficial part of what remain'd (in plenty) in the Filter, did also in the Air acquire a Green Colour. But tho our So∣lution pour'd off from the subsid∣ed Powder, was warily and slowly evaporated, yet we did not find it would well Crystallize What use may be made in Physick, of Preparations of this kind, I leave to you, whose Profession as well as Curiosity will ingage you to consider. I do not presume to tell you, but in general it seems that Steel Prepar'd with Volatile Spi∣rits of the Animal Kingdom that are wont to be friendly to Nature, and are very contrary to Acids, may have new qualities very dif∣fering from those of Steel Prepar'd with Acids, and may be more safe in some Cases and to some Patients. With what other Volatile Menstru∣ums I have dissolv'd Mars, and what Phaenomena some Tryals I made with that Metal open'd by Page  103 such Salts, you may command an Account of, if you think it worth desiring.
A Design'd Chymical Medi∣cine.
Another Experiment that I made on Steel, was design'd to make as much of it Volatile, as I could with a Menstruum, not so Corrosive or Dangerous to the Body as Oyl of Vitriol, or Spirit of Niter, which, especially the former, are imploy'd by divers Chy∣mists to make Chalybeat Prepara∣tions that yet are not Volatile. The Medicinal Scope I had in my Eye, for I had also a Chymical one (that belongs not to this place) was to try if I could by it obtain any Sulphur ofMars, which the Commendations that some, even of those Chymists, whether Adepti or not, whose Authority I most regard, represent Page  104 as an excellent Medicine, especi∣ally in Cases that require Anody∣nes, and which the others, or the same speak of as a graduatory Substance (as to some Metals) or both: If you should ask me, why I did not make use of the common Vitriolum Martis, which is easy to be had in the Shops of Chy∣mists? I answer, That my design being to try whether or no I could obtain a Sulphur, that might pro∣perly enough (tho not in the ut∣most rigor) we call Sulphur of Mars, that which is made the common way, would not answer my end, since tho I should be able from this Vitriol to obtain a real Sulphur; yet I should not think it safe thence to conclude, that it came from the Metal, and not from the Menstruum; because I have several times from Oyl of Vitriol it self, obtain'd no contemptible proportion of Yellow and Com∣bustible Sulphur. To which I add, that the acquisition of a Metalline Page  105Sulphur, tho it was not the only thing that I aim'd at in this Pre∣paration, for I presum'd, that at least I should make a very great Comminution of the parts of Steel, which is one of the main things aim'd at by the more Rational Physicians in the Preparations of that Metal.
Upon these and the like grounds, I pitcht upon good Spirit of Sea-Salt as a Menstruum, much fitter for my purpose than either Oyl of Vitriol or the Acid part of Sul∣phur; and accordingly in a good many Ounces of this Menstruum, we dissolv'd as much as we easily could of choice Filings of fine Steel, and having filter'd the Green Solution, we very slowly Evapo∣rated it in a Glass Vessel, and took such care not to spoil the matter, that we had store of fine Green Crystals that were not very small, and lookt prettily; most of these we put into a strong, but small Re∣tort, and by degrees of Fire, and a Page  106 strong one, for the last hours; we obtain'd divers Ounces of a Li∣quor that came over in white Fumes, like Mists driven by the Wind, and afforded a Sulphureous Smell: This Liquor we rectify'd, and had a Yellow Ponderous Spi∣rit, that seem'd to be much more of Kin to the Spirit of Sea-Salt, than to the common Oyl of Vitriol; especially since being mixt with Aqua-fortis, it would, like Spirit of Salt, make it a Menstru∣um, that would even in the Cold Dissolve Gold in thin Leaves. Which last words I add, because having put into a little of it alrea∣dy made Yellow, by having dis∣solv'd Leaf-Gold a very thin Plate, but a pretty deal thicker than a Leaf of Hammer'd Gold, the Men∣struum made it look all over white, almost like Silver, which seem'd to argue, that this Vitriolate Men∣struum differ'd from common Spi∣rit of Salt. And however, it may be worth taking notice of by the Page  107 By, that not only Vitriols Blue, as is well known to Chymists, but that Vitriols of one of those Co∣lours, and whereof the same Me∣tall is the basest, may differ much from one another on the score of the various, and to us perhaps, un∣known Menstruum that dissolves the Metal, since our Green Vitri∣ol yeilds Liquors very different from common English Vitriol of Mars made with Oyl of Vitriol, tho all the three be green. Which may give us some Reason of the uncertainty, whereof Vitriol is mainly imploy'd; and 'tis perhaps worth remarking, that tho we did not find the Vitriol of Mars made the common way, nor even Roman Vitriol to dissolve in a Vinous Spirit totally Inflammable, yet it would easily enough Dissolve our Saline Vitriol, (if I may so call it) which Solution to hint that in Transitu, you may perhaps see cause to im∣ploy as a Medicine in several Cases, and particularly as a Styptic in Page  108 Wounds, since its Tast is very A∣stringent, its Parts very Subti, and made fit by the Vinous Spirit, to prevent Corruption; especially in those Clymates where Chirurge∣ons complain. That they can scarce prevent the Breeding of Worms in Wounds, unless they do betimes Dress them with Spir. of Wine or Brandy.
But that which we chiefly aim'd at in this Operation, was the dry part, of what was Elevated by the force of the Fire. This we found to be distinguishable, partly by its Situation, and partly by more du∣rable Accidents, into three kinds of Substance, whereof one was almost like a Powder, which after the Contact of Air, did in a while come over to be of a Yellow Co∣lour, almost like Sulphur, but it was not indeed truly Combustible Sulphur. The other Substance consisted of larger parts, and was of a deep Colour, between Read and Brown. But the third, which Page  109 seem'd the most Copious of all, was made up of fine parts, larger than the former, of a deep Reddish Colour, and adorn'd with a fine Gloss, like that of Scales of Fishes, that look'd very prettily.
The Caput Mortuum was found to be of a Texture that would have surpriz'd most Men; for a great part of it appeared to be turn'd into a Talky Substance, consisting of pretty broad and very thin Plates, smooth and glossy, that lay upon, and against one another, like those that make up Muscovia-Glass, when the pieces are more thick than large.
Page  110
CHAP. V.
CONTAINING Experiments and Observati∣ons Solitary; in two Pen∣tades.
The I. PENTADE.
EXPERIMENT I. A notable Comminution of Gold into Powder that will sink in Water.
TO manifest into how great a multitude of Corpuscles, gross and heavy enough to sink to the bottom even of a Saline Li∣quor in the form of Precipitate or Powder; I thought of this Ex∣pedient. We took a Grain of Re∣fin'd Page  111 Gold, and having dissolv'd it without heat in a competent quan∣tity of good Aqua Regia, we put to it by guess about two Spoonfuls of Water, and then by a Thread we hung in the mixture a little bit of clean metaline Body, and kept it suspended in the Liquor for many hours (or some few days.) By this means we obtain'd, as we expected, a Precipitate of a fine and deep Colour, so copious and so light, that it was a long time before it would all settle at the bottom. Then looking upon the remaining part of the Suspended Metaline Body, we found it so very little less than when the whole was first put in, that the diminution of it was not judg'd to amount to near a Grain. By which Experiment it appear'd, that one Grain of Gold, not swiming in parts separately invisible, as 'tis in Solutions, but reduc'd to a Ma∣nifest Powder, seem'd to make a considerable quantity of Precipi∣tate Page  112 at the bottom of the Cylin∣drical Vial, whose Diameter was about an Inch, that we kept it in. And this Glass being a little shak∣en, the Precipitate would rise like a Mud, and be so thorowly disperst in the form of a Powder, through the whole Body of the Liquor, and a greater quantity of Water added to it, that at first it would seem Opacous, and after some time, it would appear like a high and lovely Purple Solution. So that one Grain of Gold (for the Colour argu'd that there was some of that Metal, in every Corpuscle of the Precipitate) was reduc'd in∣to as many Grains of Powder, as suffic'd to lodg themselves in all the Particles of space great enough to be visible, that were contain'd in a Mass of sixteen Drachms (is Two Ounces) of Water.
Page  113
EXPERIMENT II. A Proof of the Metalline Nature of Granates.
I have else where endeavour'd to shew that divers, if not most, of the real Vertues of some Gems, (for there are too many Fa∣bulous ones ascrib'd to them) may in probability proceed from the Particles of Mineral Juices, that were admitted whilst the matter was yet in Solutis Principiis, or at least soft, and afterwards Coagu∣lated with the Lapidescent part of the Stone. In confirmation of this Conjecture, I shall now observe, that having, upon some grounds not necessary to be here mention'd, suspected that Granates contain (some of them) besides some other Metalline Substances, divers Cor∣puscles of a Martial Nature; I made choice of some small ones, which by their deep and almost dark Page  114 Colour, (to name no other Signs) I guess'd to contain somewhat of Iron or Steel; and apply'd to them a pretty vigorous Loadstone, which as I expected, readily took them up and to which they constantly stuck afterward, till I forcibly se∣parated them from it. But tho I try'd this upon more parcels of Garnets than one or two, yet I found that there was not many in one heap, that would easily adhere to the Magnet.
EXPERIMENT III.
A Gentleman Eminent for his Travels into Eastern Parts, and for his Skill in Jewels, told me, in Confirmation of my Opinion about the Origine of Gems from Fluid Materials; that he had seen a white Saphir that was a Table-Stone, as they speak, i. e. flat and not cut in Facets, about the middle of which there was a Cavity about the bigness of a large Pins head, Page  115 or small Fitch, that contain'd in it a drop of Liquor that it seems could not be Coagulated into Stone with the rest of the Matter: Which Liquor, he said, was very easily discernible by its shifting places in the Cavity, when the Stone was put into differing Po∣stures. And when I ask't, whe∣ther there was no Flaw or Com∣missure in the Stone, at which the Liquor may be suspected to have got in; he assur'd me that there was none, but that the Cavity was every way encompast by the solid Stone, and was about the thickness of three Barly Corns be∣neath the upper Superficies of it.
SCHOLIUM.
It may be here fit to give notice once for all, about the Experiments that are in the following Collect∣ions, styl'd Solitary, that tho most of them are deliver'd nakedly as Page  116 matters of Fact, without any such Introduction or subsequent Re∣flection, as may be met with some∣times expressly, and oftner by In∣timation in divers others; yet that it should not be thence infer'd, either those that are simply recit∣ed, were lighted on by chance, or made at all adventures, or that they are of no use, because for the most part there is not any ex∣pressly ascribed to them: For as they were not written without a particular occasion and scope too, so that many of them may be ap∣ply'd to good purposes, will, per∣chance, be found here and there in our other Writings. And to make it probable in general, that most of them may not be useless, it may perhaps suffice that we re∣fer to what we have elsewhere pur∣posely Discoursed, about the uses of Experiments (even) to Specu∣lative Philosophy.
This may pass for a general Scholium applicable to most of Page  117 those Experiments that are not attended with any particular Scho∣lium, nor any thing in the Experi∣ment or Observation its self, that may easily by an attentive Reader, be made to supply the place of a Scholium. Which last clause I add, to intimate, that besides my hast, another reason why so many Scholium's, as may be expected in the following Collection, will not be found in it, was, because the proemial part did, on several occa∣sions, make it needless to subjoynAnnotations.
EXPERIMENT IV.
An Ingenious and Credible Per∣son (Mr. W.) assur'd me, that in one of the fine Gardens near Genoa, that he delighted to Visit, there was Pond, which being made on the side of a Hill, the Wall next the bottom of the Hill was so high, that Men could not look over it into the Pond, nor be at all Page  118 seen over it by the Fishes in the Pond; and yet he has several times observ'd these Fishes to be call'd together by the Gardiner, as he pleas'd, with a certain noise that the Gardiner made to assem∣ble them, tho neither he nor any man else could be discover'd by the Fishes that readily obey'd their Summons.
This Relation may be of use in the Controversy, Whether Fishes hear under Water.
EXPERIMENT V.
Upon occasion of what is else∣where said of the Production of vivid apparent Colours by the breaking of the beams of Light, on Corpuscles extraordinary Mi∣nute, tho solid; I took a Globe of rock Chrystal, which being for a certain use saw'n in two by a Cutter of Gems, and having lookt upon the flat Surfaces, ob∣served to the Sun Beams, the lit∣tle Page  119 Particles that (notwithstanding their seeming smoothness in the Shade) asperated their Surfaces, did so retract and reflect the Light, as to make them exceed the vivid Colours of the Rain-bow, (but in a somewhat interrupted manner) sometimes on one part of the Sur∣face, sometimes on another, as the Surface happen'd to be Scituated in reference to the Sun.
And having caused a choice and fine Grain'd Touch-stone to be likewise saw'n asunder by the same Artificer, to make two of it; I observed upon the new Surfaces made by this Action, that to the Touch smooth and polish'd, such vivid Colours as I lately mention'd to be these Surface, were put in to various Position in reference to the Sun and the Eye; so that not∣withstanding the great transparen∣cy of the Chrystal and great Opa∣city of the Touch-stone, their su∣perficial Corpuscles were found fit to exhibit (in due positions) the Page  120 vivid Colours we admire in the Rain-bow.
The II PENTADE.
EXPERIMENT I.
Having for less than two hours borrow'd an Oculus Munai, whose Colour * was White, whose Figure was Round and plain Convex, and whose Diameter, I judg'd, to be about a third part of an Inch (ra∣ther less than more) I put it into a very shallow Glass Vessel almost fill'd with fair Water, and observ'd within one Minute, or thereabout, with the Minute-Watch, that one part of the Edg began to appear somewhat Diaphanous, and the whole Stone did by degrees lose its Whiteness, appearing of a dark Brownish Colour: When this Change had reach'd the whole Surface, I look'd upon my Watch, and found that the Stone had lain Page  121 nine Minutes in the Water; out of which having taken it, I per∣ceiv'd the Body was grown Semi-Diaphanous, and the parts near the Edg being less thick, appear'd to have lost much more of their for∣mer Opacity than the innermost part had. Then putting the Stone presently into the Water again, I let it lye there so long till the Time efflux'd, since the begining of the Experiment amounted just to half an Hour. Then taking it out, and wiping it, I found it was grown much more clear, since being held against the light, it look'd almost like Yellow Amber, but not quito so Diaphanous. Then I expos'd it to the Contact of the Air, in the Scales of a very good Ballance (where it weigh'd four Grains and about a quarter) and left it for a quarter, or near half an Hour, in that Ballance to try if by the re∣cess of any imbib'd aqueous Moi∣sture it would become lighter; but want of Time hindred me from Page  122 compleating the Experiment, but did not deter me from making an∣other Observation, which was, that within about a single Minute of an Hour, a portion of the Stone near one part of the Edg, was mani∣festly grown Opacous and Whit∣ish, and within not many Minutes after, the whole Stone began to appear in a changing condition, but did not change in every part at once, nor did the alteration make an uniform Progression; but here one might successively disco∣ver divers white Arches, or as 'twere Zones, that were parallel enough to one another, and be∣ing quite Opacous, intercepted be∣tween them other little Zones, which being yet Semi-opacous, appear'd of a Brown Colour, and concurr'd to make the Stone look like a very pretty Agate, where∣in the Whiteness made a continu∣ed Progress as long as the Time permitted me to observe it: And the Possessor assur'd me, that with∣in Page  123 an Hour or or two it would be all of a Cream White (as he express'd himself) which I thought the more Credible, because I saw one part of it, that was pretty broad, to have obtain'd already a White∣ness, little, if at all inferiour to that of Ivory.
EXPERIMENT II. Remarkable Observations about Hur∣ricanes.
The late Governour of the Ber∣mudas Islands, (very much subject to Hurricanes) in Answer to my Questions, about the Presages of those hideous Tempests, inform'd me, that these were of the prin∣cipal Forerunners. First, That the Sea would manifestly swell at some distance from the Shores, inso∣much, that the Fishermen would divers times make to Land, and warn the Inhabitants, upon the confidence of that Presage, to Page  124 provide against that dismal Storm, tho the Sea were then smooth enough. Secondly, That the Sea would beat with great Noise a∣gainst the Shore, especially the Rocks, tho there appear'd no manifest Cause, as upon the ac∣count of the Wind or Tide, why it should do so. And this Sign would sometimes not appear till many Hours, or perhaps a full Day after that foremention'd. And sometimes 'twas observ'd, that the Sea would now and then suddenly Invade the Shore, and gain further upon it than could be accounted for by the Wind or Tide, and then quickly Ebb away beyond the usual Low water-Mark, and after return again with more fury, and fall back further than before. Thirdly, That some∣times there would be perceiv'd an ungrateful Smell in the Air, be∣fore the Hurricane began to Blow. And Fourthly and Lastly, My Re∣lator affirm'd to me, both he and Page  125 others had seen many Bundles, as it were of long Streaks of differ∣ing Colours, some Whitish, some Reddish, and some Blewish, or Greenish, which by reason of their Figure are usually call'd in those parts Horse-Tails: And these were seen in parts of the Sky, where the Air was Troubled indeed, but yet no form'd Clouds did appear to the Eye.
EXPERIMENT. III. A Monstrous Pearl.
Yesterday a curious Person came to shew me a Mon∣strous Pearl, if I may * so call it, because it was very ir∣regularly shap'd, and of an En∣ormous bigness. For tho it were so artificially set in Gold, that by the help of a little of that Metal fitly plac'd here and there, the whole Jewel represented a Lion; yet I made shift to Measure it ex∣actly Page  126 enough with a Pair of Ca∣lapar Compasses, (as they call those whose Legs are made Arch-wise) and found the Length to be just an Inch and an Half, and the great∣est Breadth (where yet it was of a proportionate Thickness) to be 2/10 or 4/5 of an Inch. The Colour was Orient enough, all but one dark Spot, which by its size, figure, and situation, I guess'd to be the remains of that Part (whether like an Umbilical Cord or no) whereby it was fasten'd to the Naker or Shell of the Fish that produc'd it.
EXPERIMENT IV. An odd Observation about the Influence of the Moon.
I know an Intelligent Person, that having by a very dangerous Fall, so broken his Head, that di∣vers large Pieces of his Skull were taken out, as I could easily per∣ceive Page  127 by the wide Scars that still remain; Answer'd me, that for di∣vers Months that he lay under the Chirurgeons Hands, he constantly observ'd, that about Full Moon, there would be extraordinary Prickings and Shootings in the wounded Parts of his Head, as if the Meninges were stretched or press'd against the rugged Parts of the broken Skull, and this with so much pain, as would for 2 or 3 Nights hinder his Sleep, of which at all other times of the Moon he us'd to injoy a compe∣tency. And this Gentleman add∣ed, that the Chirurgeons, (for he had 3 or 4 at once) observ'd from Month to Month, as well as he, the Operation of the Full Moon upon his Head, informing him, that they then manifestly perceiv∣ed an Expansion or Intumescence of his Brain; which appear'd not at all at the New Moon; (for that I particularly ask'd) nor was he then obnoxious to the forementi∣on'd Pricking pains.
Page  128
EXPERIMENT. V. An uncommon Experiment about Heat and Cold.
To confirm what we have else∣where deliver'd a∣bout the Mechanical * Origine of Heat and Cold, we devis'd the following Experi∣ment: We took a small and her∣metically seal'd Thermoscope, whose Stem was divided into parts, equal enough as to Sense, by little Specks of Amel, that sharp Liquors might not eat off or spoil the Marks. The Ball of this Instrument we put into a slender Cylindrical Vessel, (call'd in the Shops a Mustard Glass) and more than cover'd it with strong Oyl of {vitriol}, and left it there awhile to be reduc'd to the temper of the sur∣rounding▪ Liquor. Then we cast upon it by degrees, grosly Powder'd, * which presently Page  129 was wrought on furiously by the Menstruum; and by this Conflict, was produc'd a seeming Effervescence, with great noise and store of Froth, which more than once was ready to run out of the Vessel. But for all this seeming Ebullition, the mixture instead of growing Hot, did real∣ly grow Colder and Colder, as ap∣pear'd not only when the Vessel was touch'd by the Fingers on the outside, but by a surer mark, which was the descent of the colour'd Spirit of Wine. How much farther it would have de∣scended, (for the Liquor was not near satiated with the {salt}) we were hinder'd from Discover∣ing by an unlucky Accident, that broke the Thermometer, and put an end to that First part of our Experiment. But this was no hindrance to the Second part, which for its Novelty we mainly design'd. For when we pour'd this actually and considerably Page  130 Cold Mixture into three or four times its weight (by guess) of as much common Water, that was likewise actually Cold; this Second Mixture did, as I expected, im∣mediately grow so Hot, that I did not like to keep my Finger for a Minute or two upon the outside of the Glass.
An Advertisement about the Nature and Scope of the Chymical Experiments contain'd in the following Pentades.
CHAP. V.
Containing two Pentades of Chymical Experiments.
BEfore you enter upon the per∣usal of the following Pen∣tades, I think my self oblig'd to give you notice, that you will be deceiv'd if you expect to find them consist, either Solely or Mainly, of Spagirical Secrets, or difficult and elaborate Processes. I do not in∣deed Page  132 deny, that I am not altoge∣ther unfurnish'd with such as in probability, most Readers would refer to Experiments of that Na∣ture, and you may find divers of them scatter'd upon fit occasions, in several of my Writings: But in the present Tract, tho I have not forborn to mention here and there as many Particulars of that sort, as I thought necessary to excite and maintain the Curiosity, and sustain the Attention of a Reader that Relishes nothing that is not Season'd with somewhat that is not common; yet in this Trea∣tise, wherein I aim'd not to ap∣pear a Chymist, so much as to make my Reader a Naturalist; it was more suitable to my design, tho not more conducive to my Cre∣dit, that the following Pentades (which God permitting, may in tract of time, much increase in Number) should mainly consist of Experiments, rather useful than Specious; my design being to con∣tribute Page  133 some sound Materials to∣wards the Erection of a solid and useful Natural Philosophy. In making choice of which Materi∣als, I usually prefer those Expe∣riments that afford the more Light to those that appear with the most Luster, and those that are proper to increase the Readers skill, to those that make an Ostentation of the Writers. On which ground it is, that, whatever I may do, where I purposely Recommend Chymistry, I make this small Col∣lection, consist mainly of simple and not Intricate or elaborate Ex∣periments. Those that are Simple being not only more easy to be Try'd, and if need be, Reiterated without much trouble, or danger of erring; but (which I more re∣gard) more easy to be judg'd of, as to their Causes,Phenomena and effects, and consequently more fit to ground Notions and Reason∣ings upon: Divers of which may probably in the applications that Page  134 sagacious Persons may make of them, prove to be of Practical as well as Theorical use. Thus tho a Wedg of Gold and a Diamond be, one more Rich and finely Co∣lour'd, and the other more pre∣cious and sparkling than a piece of Steel and a Hint; yet on many occasions the two latter are far more serviceable to Mankind than the former: Since not those that are more priz'd for themselves, but those that in comparison seem despicable, afford Sparks, which do not only give Light, but are fit to kindle Fires, which both afford incomparably more Light, and in the application are of ex∣cellent and necessary use in the Kitchins of Families, the Forges of Smiths of all sorts, the Fur∣naces of Myne-men, and the Labo∣ratories of Chymists.
Page  135
The I. PENTADE.
EXPERIMENT I. To Dissolve Crude Gold with dry Bodies.
Because the generality of Chy∣mists make so great a matter of Aurum Potabile, tho they cannot deny, but that by their Preparati∣ons it is not made irreducible; and because also I am willing to grant, that even some Preparations, that leave the Metal reducible, may yet be of considerable use in Phy∣sick (the grounds of which Opi∣nion I elsewhere declare, and shall not here repeat) I will in this place set down a Process, which tho I do not overmuch value, serv'd me well enough on some occasions, to Vye with those that much vaunt∣ed their particular ways (as they thought them) of making Aurum Potabile, I told them, I could Page  136 make one in an hour or two's time without a Furnace; and that without any other Distill'd Liquor whatsoever than common Spirit of of Wine well Dephlegm'd.
This I did several times, after the following manner. I prepar'd a Saline Mixture consisting of one part of Sal Almonia•, two parts of Roch Allum, and four parts of pure Nitre. This being well pulveriz'd and mingl'd, I rub'd diligently in a Glass or Marble Mortar, with 15 or 16 parts in weight of the whole Mixture of Leaves of Gold, such as Apothecaries and Book-binders use. Then I put this into a small new Crucible, and putting a few, and but a few, kindled Coals round about it, and at a little distance from it, to neal the Vessel; I soon after approacht them, till the heat made the Matter melt, and so with that gentle Fire, I kept it in fusion, till it visibly emitted no more Fumes but grew dry again.
Page  137 This sign appearing, I present∣ly took it off from the Fire, and whiles it was yet warm, dug it out, as clean as I could, and having seasonably pulveriz'd it, that it might not attract the Moi∣sture of the Air; I put upon it some highly rectify'd Spirit of Wine, which within an hour or less time, was enobled with a rich Golden Colour. And according∣ly I found it to be a real Soluti∣on of Gold, by divers Tryals that I purposely made, to evince it to be so.
Of this and some other less common Preparations of ☉ more may be met with hereafter.
EXPERIMENT. II. Luna Cornea by Distillation.
There was taken ℥III of well refin'd Silver, thinly Laminated, and six of common Sublimate. This was put first into a Retort, Page  138 and the Silver cut into small pie∣ces, was put in after, that the matter lying uppermost might be Penetrated by the ascending Fumes: But the Fire having not been made strong enough, the Sublimate was Elevated to the uppermost part of the Retort, and left the Silver scarce at all chang'd in the bottom of the Glass. Wherefore we put the same Sub∣limate and Metal into another Retort, and administring a stron∣ger Fire, that the Sublimate might be thorowly melted before it could flee away, we obtain'd no run∣ning Mercury at all, but the greatest part of the Sublimate was Elevated in its usual form, leav∣ing behind it the Silver in a Lump, which stuck hard to the bottom of the Glass, and appear'd much alter'd. For besides that there was acquir'd ℥I. in weight, many of the pieces of Metal stuck together, and seem'd at least half Melted, and were of a kind of Horny and Page  139 Semi-Diaphanous Substance, which would readily enough Melt almost like Sealing-Wax, when I held it to the Flame of a Candle, at which yet I could not perceive it mani∣festly to take Fire.
SCHOLIUM.
'Tis here to be noted once for all, that in this and divers other Chymical Experiments, there is sometimes much more deliver'd than is necessary to make good the Title, or the thing mainly in∣tended. But 'twas thought fit, not to Dismember or Mutilate the entire Memoir as 'twas regi∣ster'd, because that of the other Particulars some may be, tho in∣directly, refer'd to the principal part, and others may be look't on as Phaenomena, which may be of use at least to me, by keeping me from forgetting them, and pro∣bably tend to the main design of all these Experiments, viz. to Page  140 contribute to a Natural History, which may respect Practice, as well as Theory.
EXPERIMENT. III. Mercury growing warm with Silver.
We took ʒII of animated (or antimonial) Quicksilver, and put it into the palm of ones Hand; we put to it by degrees a Dram and an Half of Powder of fine Silver, made by Precipitation with Copper the ordinary way (but with more than ordinary care). Whilst this Mixture was making with ones Finger, he that held it in his hand, confess'd he found it grow sensibly Warm; and I, whose Finger was considerably Warm, could not with it perceive any coldness in the Amalgame. This in a very short time became of a soft, and (as to sense) uni∣form consistence, and so soft that it was like almost melted Butter, Page  141 insomuch that we added half a Dram more of the Calx of Silver, without rendring the Amalgame at all too stif; and perhaps we might have added the other half Dram, without overcharging that penetrant Mercury: in which case it had swallowed up full its own weight of Silver; so different it was from common Mercury; and when we left off, it had reduc'd into a very yeilding form, three quarters of its own weight of solid Metal. This aaa we put in∣to a small Vyal, and stopt the Glass with a Cork, to observe whe∣ther the Amalgame would harden without intercourse with the free Air. Next morning it appear'd to be concreted in the Glass; and the next morning after that, we broke the Glass to take out the Matter, which we found conside∣rably hard, but brittle enough.
Page  142
EXPERIMENT. IV. The Durableness of the Faculty of a certain prepar'd Mercury to grow Hot with Gold.
To convince those that Treat the Incalescense of Prepar'd Mer∣cury and of Gold, as a Chymical Chymera; I sent in a Conceal'd way to the Royal Society, some Mercury laboriously Prepar'd in my Furnaces, whereof ℥I. being put upon a due proportion of a Calx of Gold made by the com∣mon way, (Quartation) they grew presently and very sensibly hot in the Palm of ones Hand. I shall now add, that to try whether this surprizing Faculty of growing hot immediately upon Gold, will con∣tinue any long time in the Mercu∣ry; I lately took some that I had (for a certain purpose) kept Her∣metically seal'd in a Glass Egg for divers Years, (if I mistake not, Page  143 Ten or Twelve at least) and hav∣ing Reiterated the foremention'd Tryal with it; first alone, and then in the presence of a Culti∣vator of Chymistry; it pre∣sently grew hot with the ☉ in the palm of the Hand. And having Distill'd off the Mercury, and try'd it again as well as some that was Undistill'd, if I much misremember not, it did again heat with the Gold.
EXPERIMENT. V. An uncommon way of operating upon ♁.
When Chymists expose Anti∣mony, for instance, and divers other Consistent, but not fixt Bo∣dies, to the action of the Fire, they are wont to do it in Vessels, either open, as when they make Calx, or Glass of Antimony, or at least in Vessels that are not so close: But that there is Air includ∣ed Page  144 with the matter, as when they Sublime it in Glasses, or in Earth∣en subliming Pots; and tho they regard not this included Air, be∣cause usually there is not much of it in the Vessel, yet it may have a not inconsiderable influence on the effects of the Fires Operation, not only as it contributes to the ascen∣tion and sustentation of dissipated parts of the Mineral, but as it affords these Corpuscles room to fly to and fro in it, and thereby make Associations or Coalitions and Concretions that otherwise would not be produc'd. Upon this account I guest that it may be, on divers occasions, a thing of use for Discoveries, and perhaps too, for Practice, to imploy a Me∣thod, that the Body expos'd to the action of the Fire, may be kept from the Contact of the Air, at least as to any sensible portions of it, and being as it were included in Bodies almost equivalent to Solids; and one may Page  145 suppress the free emission and a∣scent of Exhalations, and so to make an Operation, not only in Clauso, but as it were in Solido, and reduce the parts of the Body Expos'd, and perhaps the Igneous Corpuscles to act reciprocally up∣on one another, without any notable Dissipation, or Avolation of Parts.
To apply now what hath been said, to Antimony; I shall briefly set down an uncommon way that came into my mind of Operating upon it. We took well powder'd ♁, and well dry'd (white) Chalk reduc'd likewise to Powder; with these in a large Earthen Pot or Crucible, we made SSS. having a care to make the lowermost and uppermost bed of Chalk, and the last thicker than any of the rest, as also that none of the Antimo-nial Layers, were but of a moderate thickness, that the Heat might pe∣netrate them the better; then the Vessel, being cover'd, was put Page  146 among the kindled Coals of a good digestive Furnace, (not be∣cause such a one was necessary, but because 'twas at hand) where 'twas kept for a competent time, which according to the bigness of the Pot, and the strength of the Fire, may be sometimes 20 or 24 Hours, sometimes a Day and a Half, and sometimes two Days or better.
The II. PENTADE.
EXPERIMENT I. A very uncommon way of making a Cale of Gold.
'Tis known that most Chymists, and many Physicians, have a Su∣perlative Esteem for the Medici∣nal Vertues of Gold, and the Pre∣parations of it. And upon this ground, divers of them have long been, and still are Solicitous to makeCalces of Gold by differing Page  147 ways; most of them laborious, and some of them scarce to be safely wrought and us'd in Phy∣sick: Wherefore I shall, I presume, be easily Pardon'd, if I here set down a way that came into my mind, and that I have sometimes us'd to make a preparation where∣in Gold is reduc'd to very mi∣nute Parts, without the help of Mercury, or of any Precipitation made by sharp Salts, whether Acid or Lixivial.
We took then refin'd Gold, and dissolv'd it in clean and Spirituous Aqua Regia, and instead of Preci∣pitating the clear Solution with Oyl of Tartar per deliquium, as is usually done, or with Spirit of Sal Armoniac, or other Volatile Urinous Spirits, we first with a very modest Heat drew off the Superfluous Liquor; whereby the Gold with the remaining part of the Menstruum, was left in the ap∣pearance of a thick and Oleous Liquor. This done, we pour'd Page  148 upon it a treble weight of Vinous Spirit totally inflammable and in a short time, we had, as we expect∣ed, a very subtil Powder, or high colour'd Calx of Gold, that sub∣sided at the bottom; the Men∣struum being strangely dulcifi'd as to Tast, and become fragrant in point of Smell When a very few days were past, we decanted the Liquor, and put on it fresh ardent Spirit, and leaving them a while together, there subsided the like well colour'd Calx more plentiful∣ly than the first time.
I know not, to add that upon the by, whether it may, or may not be worth while to try to Disco∣ver whether this Dulcifi'd A. R. Spirituosa being drawn off from the subsiding Gold, may have acquir'd any Virtue from the open'd Metal. Some Tryals seeming to argue that the openness of this Calx made it fit to be easily wrought upon by a Menstruum that would not touch Water-Gold, as they Page  149 call the common Calx made by quartation, nor yet Leaf-Gold, such as the Apothecaries Imploy; but however the Menstruum has ac∣quir'd such qualities as make it seem likely to prove an useful Me∣dicine, which yet I refer to Tryal.
By the way we pitch'd upon to make this Powder of Gold, it seem'd probable, that it would not (at least) be less subtil, and yet would be more mild, than com∣mon Preparations; and neverthe∣less we thought it might, perhaps, make it yet more secure, if we should, as we did, put upon it a totally Ardent Vinous Spirit, and burn it off once, twice, or thrice, to carry off with it any little Co∣rosive or Saline Particles▪ that may have still adher'd to the Metalline ones.
N. B. The Spirituous Aqua Re∣gia, mention'd in the Process, is so call'd by me, partly to distinguish it from the common Aqua Regia, and partly because 'tis indeed of a Page  150 more Spirituous Nature than the common, being compos'd without any gross Salt; Such as * but only of Spirits. This Menstruum I made for some particular uses: And tho it works more slowly than the common Chrysulca, yet I often prefer it to this, as that which I can imploy to some un∣common purposes, and as it may probably be a more innocent Men∣struum in making Preparations of Sol, design'd for Medicinal uses. I make it very easily, by mixing one part of good Spirit of Salt, with two parts of strong Spirit of Niter, or (when 'tis not to be us'd for Medicines) of common, but clean Aqua Fortis.
SCHOLIUM.
The above recited Tryal was made as 'tis deliver'd; but some Circumstances that I took notice of, and particularly some Grains of Powder that, tho mingl'd with Page  151 the rest, were shining, as if they had been extreamly Minute, and bright Filings of Gold. These Circumstances, I say, made me Suspect that the Success might much depend upon particular and nice Circumstances that may need more exact Tryal, than I had then occasion to make; and there∣fore it may be fit that the Expe∣riment be heedfully repeated. It may also be try'd whether the im∣ploying common A. R. instead of the Spirituous, will much vary the Experiment.
EXPERIMENT II.
To try how much Volatile Salt an assign'd quantity of Water would Dissolve, we took ℥III of Distill'd Water, and put into it by degrees, some dry Salt of Salt Ar∣moniac (that was very White, and compact enough) keeping the Li∣quor in digestion for a pretty while, that it might have time to Page  152 Dissolve as much as it could. When we found it would Dissolve no more in a moderate Heat, we took it off, and found that after standing some Hours in the Cold there fell to the lower part of the Glass, and setled there, a pretty quantity of Salt, which we guess'd to be about ʒII, which being de∣ducted from ℥II, that had been in all put in, there remained ℥I and ʒVI in the Liquor, which by this account had Dissolv'd at least half its weight of Salt.
SCHOLIUM.
I desire it may not be thought strange, if among our Chymical Experiments, some few shall be here and there met with, that are much less Elaborate or Promising than others that I could easily have inserted in their Rooms; for I did it on set purpose, partly be∣cause oftentimes (as was intimated at the beginning of the Chapter) Page  153 some more simple or seemingly less valuable Experiments may be fitter materials, than more curi∣ous ones, for the Natural History we would promote; and partly to give an Example, if mine can sig∣nifie any thing, of not disdaining to Register some things that seem mean; if by the light they afford, or the uses they may be apply'd to, they compensate the want of Lustre, and of immediate Utility. And the substance of this Scholi∣um I desire may be mentally trans∣ferr'd, as occasion shall require, to those following Chapters that Treat of Chymical Experiments.
EXPERIMENT. III.
Perhaps some Chymists will think that the following Memoir may give hints that may be of use on several occasions, both for other purposes, and for theirs, that would draw Tinctures from seve∣ral Bodies, that will not afford Page  154 them in simple Spirit of Wine, tho well rectifi'd.
The simple Spirit of good French Verdigreas, being once or twice abstracted from as much Salt of Tartar as it would dissolve in the Cold; left the Salt easily susible, and dissoluble in highly rectifi'd Spirit of Wine.
EXPERIMENT IV.
I have not been unacquainted with some Curious and Elabo∣rate Preparations of that noble Flower the Rose; and experience hath convinc'd me that tis pos∣sible, whatever most Chymists think of it, to obtain from Roses a true essential Oyl, that mixes not with Water, and is exceeding fra∣grant: But there are several that are so far from believing that an Essential Oyl may be obtain'd from Roses, without being in the form of a Butter, but in a liquid one like Oyl of Cloves, or Wormwood, Page  155 that they doubt whether a true Spiritus Ardens can be obtain'd from them, without addition of Wine, or some such inflamable Li∣quor. I shall here transcribe the following Note, as containing a more simple and easie Preparation (than any of those before menti∣on'd) of the Ardent Spirit of those Flowers, and therefore more suit∣able to the design of the whole Chapter.
To make an inflammable Spirit of Roses.
Two Bushels of Damask Roses (together with a good number of red Rose-buds) being beaten, and put into a Vessel with Water a∣mounting to about 4 Gallons, were mingled with about a quart of Ale-Yest, and kept in Fermentati∣on for about 5 or 6 days (the weather being cold for the Season) and then being Distill'd per vesicam,Page  156 afforded us a Spiritus Ardens.
EXPERIMENT. V. An Experiment about the Chymical Analysis of Pearls.
We took ℥II of Seed Pearl, that were carefully bought for Orien∣tal, and without breaking them, put them into a Retort, and Di∣stil'd them in a Sand-Furnace by degrees of Fire, giving a strong one at the last. By this means we had a little Black Oyl Swimming up∣on the Spirit, which was also dark and muddy, as if incorporated with some more Oyl. The weight of both these Liquors was 23 Grains, besides which there stuck to almost all the upper part of the Retort, a thin film of Oyl, which together with a streak of the like reaching to the bottom of the Re∣ceiver, we estimated at 3 Grains more, and so reckon'd 26 Grains for the weight of the whole as∣cended Page  157 matter. The Caput Mor∣tuum amounted to full the remain∣ng weight of two Ounces. The Empyreumatical Liquors that came over, smell'd much like those of Harts-horn, and the Spi∣rit was found to belong, as we ex∣pected, to the Tribe of Urinous ones, or, as many now call them Volatile Alcaly's For it readily hiss'd and produc'd Bubbles, with good Spirit of Salt turn'd Syrup of Violets Green, and being drop'd into Solution of Sublimate, turn'd that White; to omit another way or two, by which I examin'd it. The Oyl that stuck to the Retort, and which was faetid, like that of Harts-horn, did easily dissolve in dephlegm'd Spirit of Wine, and afforded a reddish Brown Solution. The Caput Mortuum was very black, and some Grains of it were found readily enough dissoluble in Spirit of Vinegar. Being calcin'd in a well cover'd Crucible, with a strong Fire (for a moderate one Page  158 will not do it, unless it be long) we reduc'd them to be purely White, and to a weight less by some Grains than an Ounce, and ʒIII and we found, as we expected, that being Pulveriz'd, this Calx tasted hot and bitterish upon the Tongue, like good Calx Vive, and was not only of an Alcalisate, but a Lixival Nature: For besides that it presently turn'd Syrup of Vio∣lets Green, it quickly afforded an Orange Colour'd Precipitate, with Solution of Sublimate.
Page  [unnumbered]
Strange Reports, In II. PARTS.
Address'd to a Vertuoso, Friend to the Author.
Page  [unnumbered]Page  1
Advertisement.
I Presume, Sir, you may yet remember, what I Wrote about the Nature and Scope of my Collection of Strange Re∣ports, in an Essay which take's its Title from them; and which I was encouraged to make by the Example and Authority of Aristotle. And therefore*I shall desire, that to save your Trouble and my own, That Paper may serve for a Preface to that which follows. About which, Page  2 supposing this Request to be Granted, I shall need to give you at present but this short Advertisement; That for distinction's sake, I thought fit to divide the ensuing Par∣ticulars into two Parts, be∣cause they are indeed of two sorts: One relating to things purely Natural, and the other consisting of Phaenomena, that are, of seem to be, of a Su∣pernatural Kind or Order.
The first Set of Particulars belonging to each of the two foremention'd Parts, has pre∣fixt to it the Title of the First Section, tho it be not at this time attended by a Second; because 'tis design'd, that God permitting, it shall be so here∣after, Page  3 when I shall get time to pick up out of my Adversaria, and other Memoirs, Particu∣lars fit to have plac'd in the List of Strange Reports.
I must likewise give you no∣tice, That you are not to ex∣pect the II. Part at this time: Discretion forbidding me to let that appear, till I see what En∣tertainment will be given to the I. Part, that consists but of Re∣lations far less strange than those that make up the other Part.
Page  [unnumbered]Page  5
Strange Reports. PART. I.
SECTION. I.
RElating to a judicious Vir∣tuoso, that a Physician of Bruxels a while since affirm'd to me, That he himself had prepar'd 3 or 4 resuscitable Plants, one of which he had presented to the Marquess of Castel Rodrigo, now Governor of theSpanish Nether∣lands, where this Virtuoso had not long since been. Relating this, I say, to this Gentleman, and En∣quiring of him, whether he had Page  6 seen this resuscitable Plant; he an∣swered me, That he had never seen nor heard of it; but told me on this occasion, That coming to Deal with an Apothecary of Na∣mier, if I misremember not the Name, much esteem'd for his ex∣traordinary Skill in Chymistry a∣bout some choice Preparations, wherewith this Man's Shop was furnish'd the Apothecary told the Virtuoso, that he had really pre∣par'd resufcitable Plants, a dif∣ferent way from that which others pretended to, and that he could prepare a great variety of them. And when having enquir'd of the Virtuoso, whether he himself had seen any of these prepar'd Plants, he assur'd me, that he had seen not only some, but many; I then upon farther enquiry how they appear'd, learned that the Chymist had di∣vers of them in distinct Glass-Bot∣tles; that the Apparitions that were exhibited, shew'd not the pe∣culiar Colours, but only the shape Page  7 of the Plant; but this so genuine∣ly that he could perfectly distin∣guish and easily know it to be such or such a Plant instancing parti∣cularly in Carduus Benedictus, and Camomile.
And the difference betwixt this way of Exhibiting Plants, and that which is mention'd by Quer∣cetan, and pretended to by others; I found by this Gentleman's An∣swers, to consist chiefly in these two things: The first, that the Apothecary's Plants did not as the others seem to grow up into the Air included in a Seal'd Vial, but were seen as growing in a clear Liquor, wherewith the Bottle that contain'd it was almost fill'd; and the next, That whereas to make the Apparition, mention'd byQuer∣cetan, and others, the Application of an actual Heat (as that of a Lamp, or the Sun-beams, or the like) is affirm'd to be requisite, upon the absence of which the Phantastical Plant relapses into its Page  8 Ashes. In the formation of the Apothecaries Vegetables, he doth not employ any actual Heat, but (which may seem more strange) only the shaking, of the Bot∣tle, for upon that Agitation the prepar'd Ashes or Powder being this'd from the bottom, and dis∣pers'd quite through the Liquor, when the Glass is set by in a quiet place, the scatter'd Particles by degrees so convene, as to compose a Model of the Plant they once be∣long'd to. And Heat not being requisite to their formation, these Plants do not quickly, as the Pe∣lonian Physician's Phantastick Ve∣getable, Recorded by Quercetan, fall back into a Powder; but if let alone, continu'd a great while, until the Preparer think fit by a gentle Agitation of the Bottle, to dissolve the loose Contexture of it.
Page  9
RELATION II.
I met the other day with a very intelligent Person, well vers'd in Chymistry, not credulous, and in a word very well worthy of Credit, who assur'd me, that he had himself seen a few years ago at Mentz, in the Hands of one Monsieur P—r, a Gentleman of Switzer-land, and a Virtuoso, a piece of Glass about the bigness of a Shilling, or somewhat bigger; which was Red and pretty tran∣sparent like Glass of Antimony made per se, and which this Mon∣sieur P. affirm'd to the Relator, that he Hammer'd before the present Elector of Heidelberg (to whom I told him, I had the Honour to be known, and) by whom the Re∣lator was about that time imploy'd. And this Monsieur P. being his inti∣mate Acquaintance, and perceiv∣ing that he was, (as he well might be) indispos'd to believe so strange Page  10 a thing, after he had confest the Glass to have been given him by an excellent Chymist in his Coun∣try (Switzerland); this Gentleman, I say, at the Relators earnest Re∣quest, gave him leave for his sa∣tisfaction, to lay the piece of Glass upon an Anvil, and to strike seven or eight strokes with a Ham∣mer upon it; by which means he found, that tho it was nor malle∣able (at least in the state it then was) like neal'd Silver, since it began to crack at the edges like Silver that is over-hammer'd; yet it did really stretch un∣der the Hammer, growing more thin on the beaten part, and having visible Marks or Impres∣sions made on it by the edg of the Hammer.
Page  11
RELATION III.
A Pious and Learned School-Master, that ventur'd to stay in London in the great Plague 1665, and was much Employ'd, as some Friends of mine that knew him, and commended him, assur'd me, to Visit the Sick, and distribute Alms and Relief to them, went indiscriminately to all sorts of In∣fected, and even Dying Persons, to the number, as he told me, of nine Hundred, or a Thousand; and being ask'd by me about the In∣fection of other things than Walls, he told me, That being once call'd to Administer some Ghostly com∣fort to a poor Woman that had Buried some Children of the Plague, he found the Room so lit∣tle, that it scarce held any more than the Bed whereon she lay Sick, and an open Coffin wherein he saw her Husband lye Dead of the same Disease, whom the Wife Page  12 soon after follow'd. In this little close Room they affirm'd to him, that the Contagious Steams had produc'd Spots on the very Wall; and when I ask'd, whether he him∣self had seen them, he answer'd, That he had not; but yet was inclin'd to believe the thing to be true, not only upon the score of the Relators, but because he had observ'd the like in his own Study, which being divided only by a Wall from some Rooms of a House, which the Owner had turn'd into a kind of a Pest-house, and in which, Numbers had Dyed in a short time; he took notice that the white Wall of his Study was (since the Sickness rag'd, without any other cause that he could imagine) Blemish'd in divers places with Spots, like those of Infected Persons; when (to add that upon the by) I inquir'd what Antidote he us'd; he replied, That next the Protection of God, which so many sad Objects made him the Page  13 more fervently Implore, and a con∣stant fearlesness, the only Preserva∣tive he us'd, besides good Diet, were half a Spoonful, or a Spoonful of Brandy five or Six times a day, especially when he went into In∣fected places, and the bigness of a small Nut or less, of a Root of Spanish Angelica, of which he held in his Mouth the quantity of a Pepper-corn, or somewhat less, as often as he thought there was need.
RELATION IV.
An ingenious Person, * and very worthy of Cre∣dit, inform'd me the other day, in answer to some questions that I propos'd to him, That he was Imploy'd some years ago by a Ger∣man Physician (whose Name he told me) to Distil a certain Mine∣ral not unknown to me, which he perform'd in a naked Fire, with so good success, that he had from Page  14 about half a Pound of the Mine∣ral, near ʒIII of the Liquor; this he included in a Glass with a Bubble, and a slender neck like one of my Weather-Glasses; but tho the Liquor at first reach'd not above the Bubble, but only fill'd it to the bottom of the Pipe; yet as the Moon increas'd, this Liquor, as the Doctor expect∣ed, by degrees expanded it self in the Glass, so that about the Full-Moon, it reach'd about an Inch in∣to the Pipe, and upon the De∣crease of the Moon, it subsided by degrees to the bottom of the Pipe. And when I ask'd, whether the Vessel were carefully stopt, he answer'd, That it was not only so, but Hermetically Seal'd like one of my Thermometers with Spirit of Wine, which he had seen. This the Relator averr'd to me upon his own Observation, and being desir'd, he readily gave me a description of the Mineral, and a direction where to procure it, Page  15 (which I am now endeavouring to do) adding that the same Doctor made the like Tryal with another Mineral, akin to this, with which my having heard that such an Ex∣periment had been done, gave me occasion to propose him the que∣stion.
RELATION V.
An inquisitive Traveller that not long since waited on a German Prince addicted to Chymistry, and was imploy'd by him in his pri∣vate Laboratory; being ask'd by me some questions about Ore of Bismute or Tin-glass, whereof there is said to be a Mine in that Prince's Territories, and in particular, whether he had observ'd any thing of the varying bulk of a strange Liquor obtainable from it: He answer'd me to this effect, That he had had occasion to make many Tryals upon this Mineral, and that particularly by his Prince's Page  16 command, he had Distill'd a considerable quantity of a certain sort of it (because it yields but very little Spirit) and that he there∣by obtain'd a Liquor, which being by Rectification freed from its superfluous Phlegm, amounted to about half a Pint. This Liquor was put into a Vial, which it al∣most half fill'd. This Vial being exactly stop'd, was set aside in a quiet place, where, (as the Prince expected) as the Light of the Moon increas'd, from the New-Moon towards the Full; so this Liquor gradually swell'd, and that not in a hardly perceptible degree, but very manifestly and confide∣rably; so that when the Moon was Full, the Liquor reached almost to the top of the Glass, and dur∣ing her Wane, as the Light de∣creas'd, so did the bulk of the Li∣quor, which was always least at the New-Moon. I ask'd him if any Tryal had been made, whe∣ther the Weight of this Spirit Page  17 varied with the Bulk, and he frankly confess'd to me, That it had not come into his Mind; but for what is above Related of the Increment and Decrement as to quantity affirm'd to me, that he himself, as well as his Prince had several times Observ'd it; and he also readily told me the way he used in making the Distillation, which he said, exacted an in∣tense degree of Fire.
RELATION VI.
An inquisitive Person, that having gone through his Studies in the University, Travell'd throgh divers Countries to make himself the more fit for the Pro∣fession of Physick, answer'd me, That having Resided for some time in Prussia, he had more than once or twice (and that in differing places) observ'd, as others in his Company also did, Page  18 That the Fisher-men in break∣ing the Ice of long Frozen places, and taking out thence confide∣rable Masses of Ice, did several times find in them Swallows, sometimes numerous enough, that were so inclos'd in the Ice, that unless by breaking or thawing it, they could not be gotten out of it. And he further answer'd me, That when these Lumps or Masses of Ice came to be thaw'd in their German Stoves, the Swallows, that lay as Dead before, would Revive, and per∣haps fly about the Room; but did not long survive their Re∣covery out of their Insensible state; some Dying again in few hours, others the next day, or perhaps the third; but sew or none, that he observ'd, Living beyond the fourth or the fifth; which immature Death, my Re∣lator judg'd to be caus'd by their having no Appetite to Eat, which Inappetency made them Dye Page  19 Starv'd. But as the conjecture may be true as to those that Liv'd for some days, so it seems not like that those that Perish'd in few Hours, Dyed meerly of Hunger; and as for them that were Starv'd to Death, I should suspect that they were Starv'd, not so much for want of Appe∣tite, as for want of such Animals as they us'd to Feed on, especi∣ally Flies, which they could not get in Winter.
RELATION VII.
An Inquisitive Gentleman late∣ly Return'd from Jamaica, where he was Imploy'd by the Gover∣nour to make Discoveries of Na∣tural Things, answer'd me (this Morning) that he had seen in that Island great number of Trees that bear the Silken Cotten, that he found many of them to sur∣pass in bigness and height the Page  20 larger sort of our English Oaks; and that on a Mountain that many went to Visit out of Curi∣osity, to view a stupendious Silk-Cotton Tree, he saw its Bulk, and many affirm'd to him, and it was the general Tradition of the Country, which he saw no cause to disbelieve, that this prodigi∣ous Tree was in the Body no less than 21 yards about, that is, more than 60 Foot in Compass.
The same curious Traveller told me he saw a Cannow made of the hollow'd Trunk of one of these Silk-Cotton Trees, which after all that had been taken off to give it the shape of a Vessel fit for Service, was 30 Foot about, and of at least a proportionable length.
Page  21
RELATION VIII.
A Merchant Rich and Judici∣ous, and more addicted to Let∣ters than is usual to Men of his Calling, being return'd into Eng∣land, from some of the remoter Parts of the East-Indies, to satis∣fy my Curiosity about a strange Tradition of several Navigators about a more than one way ex∣traordinary In-draught of the Sea on the Coast of a great Island of the Southern Ocean, sent me the en∣suing Relation, which tho it con∣tains something manifestly Fabu∣lous, but easily distinguishable from the rest, I give you in the Relators own Words, being un∣willing to alter any thing till I can see him again, and propose my Scruples to him.
At Campar and Rakan, on the East Coast of Sumatra, is in the Rivers Mouth (to a certain di∣stance) Page  22 at each New and Full-Moon, a Violent In-draught of the Sea, (call'd Bunna) which ap∣proacheth with an hideous noise, and Mountain-high, so that what∣soever opposeth it, Perisheth. Its approach is in three Parts, the first high, but not so terrible; the second is high, black and horrid; the third is low, and of gentle motion; before its ap∣proach, it giveth so fair warning, that the People may Eat, and bath themselves, before they weigh Anchor; but when they weigh, they must Row hard a∣gainst it, and when its fury is past, follow with it, till they re∣turn to their Anchor place. The true reason whereof the Inhabi∣tants cannot discover: But (as if Greece only were not the Mother of Fabulous Traditions) these poor Natives Fabulize, That at Campar (where is the greatest Bun∣na) in former Ages, there was a Princess, who, to shun the Rape of an insolent Casfree Slave, ran Page  23 into the Seas mouth; but the Slave still pursuing her, and after him the Princess's little-Dog; all perish'd and thus (by a new Me∣tamorphosis) these three Waves per∣petuate their Commemoration. That afterwards a bold Fellow hoping to divert this Bunna from Campar (by advice of some Wi∣zards) Row'd up against that first part of the Torrent, and filling a Bottle of its Water, which he immediately stopt up close, he betook himself to Rakan (not far distant) and pour'd it out into that Rivers Mouth, which brought the Bunna thither also, tho it left not Campar; but that Fellow sud∣denly after Dying, none durst since attempt the like, else the Natives fancy it may still be done.
My humble Opinion is, (adds my Relator) that the Mouths of those Rivers being choakt up with their Sand-Banks, and so render'd very Shallow; when the great Spring-Tydes come roaring Page  24 over those Shoals (at the New and Full-Moons) out of the Ma∣lacca Streights, the first Influx is Irresistible, by such small Vessels as use that Port, (especially if at∣tended with dark Weather or Stormy Gusts) so that they are forc'd to Weigh and Bear up a∣gainst it for fear of being Strand∣ded and Split. In which Senti∣ment I rest, till I can attain a more prevalent Reason.
RELATION IX.
A Gentleman that had Travell'd far and Observ'd much, related to me, That being off the Coast of Mosambique, between the 20th and last Days of September, the Captain of the great Portugal Ship they were in, walking to and fro upon the Deck, Spy'd a great way off, a very little dark Cloud or blackish Spot in the Sky: Whereupon, tho the Wea∣ther Page  25 were fair, he made all the hast he possibly could to provide for a great Storm, by taking in the Sails, &c. And thó for a while the Sky continu'd clear, and they had no signs of an immi∣nent Change; but that when the Cloud approacht, the Wind that had till then fill'd, their Sails ceas'd, and the Sea became Calmer than before: But pre∣sently after they had a furious Hurricane, which turn'd their Ship quite round many times one after another, as if it were an Aerial Whirl-pool, which last∣ed for above two Hours, and then left them, seeming to have a progressive Motion, as Whirl-pools in Rivers often have.
Page  26
RELATION X.
An Ingenious Practitioner of Physick, accompany'd by one of the same Profession, assur'd me with great Asseveration, That some while since, being at a place in the Country near Amsterdam, where there Liv'd a kind of a Farmer, who (tho Illiterate e∣nough) was reputed very Curi∣ous; this Person shew'd him, a∣mong other things, a considera∣ble quantity of Quicksilver that was altogether of the Colour of Gold. And, to answer my scruple, this Relator added, that the Co∣lour did not belong only to the Surface of the whole Mass; but having purposely (with Water) divided it into many Globules, each of them retain'd the same rich Colour. And he further told me, That the possessor of this yellow Mercury, having put Page  27 some of it over a Fire in a con∣venient Vessel, it quickly lost its fludity, and was precipitated in∣to a red Powder; about which he hop'd to learn some notable things at his next Visit to the Author: But that having been too long delay'd; when he came to the place again, he found to his great Grief that the Master was Dead, and his Relations were, or pretended to be, ignorant of his Secrets.
A very Learned and Experi∣enc'd Physician, made me a Visit to give me notice, that a few Days before he had receiv'd one in the Night from a couple of Strangers, one of whom by some things that he saw him do, he judg'd to be (what they call) an Adeptus, who besides a thing far more rare and valuable, shew'd him as a Curiosity, a runing Mer∣cury of a lovely Green. And when I ask'd my judicious Re∣lator, Page  28 whether he had broken the fluid Mass into Drops, to observe whether the Colour were that only of the Surface, or of the whole Mass? He answer'd, that he purposely laid it upon a rough Body, as a Carpet, and found the Globules, whereinto 'twas by this Means divided, to be of the same fine Green that had beautify'd the whole Mass.
These Relations, tho they had come to me from less Credible Persons than those I receiv'd them from, I should not hastily have rejected, because of some odd and fine Colorations of run∣ing Mercury, that I have my self Observ'd, but here forbear to men∣tion, because they belong to an∣other Paper.
FINIS.
Page  [unnumbered]
highlight hits: on | off



Powered by DLXS
To comment or inquire about content, contact eebotcp-info@umich.edu
To report errors, contact DLPS Help

